Introduction

He insisted that we meet in his office at Old Trafford. He had,
reluctantly, agreed to have his story told, but there would be no
easy intimacy on this our first meeting. Sir Matt Busby is
eighty-two. He still goes to Old Trafford every day to his small
office on the first floor of the Executive Suite. Kath, the
receptionist, is a bespectacled middle-aged lady, warm, unpre-
tentious, a comfort amid the Habitat gloss of the Executive
: Suite. She dials the first floor.
Sir Matt, Eamon Dunphys here to see you. Shall I send him
up luv?
nT
~~ The lift takes me up. Sir Matt is waiting for me when the
doors open. He is immensely charming. I am an undistin-
guished Old Boy, a reserve and youth team player for five years
-1960 to 1965. How are you, Eamon, lad? he greets me. The
handshake is firm, the welcoming smile practised, breaking
through his remarkable face, large features, handsome as a
knight should be. His is a strong and imposing physical
presence. Except for a certain deliberation in his gait, Sir Matt
could be a man of sixtysomething.
For all the sense of bodily strength and spiritual power, there
is something graceful, almost feline about him as we walk down
the short, carpeted corridor to his office. Sir Matt is affable as
a _always, yet eye contact is fleeting, he remains distant in a way
that is hard to define.
Sir Matt Busbys gift for leadership owed much to his
mystique, the elusive force men imagined lay behind the facade
of genial composure. Old players, even the greatest of them,
1
who shared extraordinary days and nights with Busby, remain
in awe of him. They speak of always wanting to please him.
Long after they were famous, universally adored and in all
worldly ways secure, it was Sir Matts attention and affection
men like Bobby Charlton, Johnny Carey, Denis Law, George
Best and Harry Gregg craved. Great athletes felt inadequate in
his presence, although he had ostensibly done nothing to induce
the feeling.
This he understood. He remained in control. Always. There
was no lilting rhetoric or heated condemnation in Manchester
Uniteds dressing-room. Words were not his means of inspiring
others or rebuking them.
Journalists, biographers and ghosts purporting to tell His
Own Story, those seeking to reveal more than he wanted
known, have found Sir Matt a daunting subject. The renowned
qualities which inspired great footballers could be redeployed
to form a barricade against intrusion. He was modest, declaring
that the only memorial he wanted was the football played by his
teams. Everything else was irrevelant, he humbly insisted.
Because potential inquisitors also wanted to please Busby they
invariably settled for the carefully crafted anecdotes which,
varying little, stud most accounts of his life. Sir Matt is prudent,
access has always been strictly limited.
I spent several years patiently wooing Sir Matt and his family
seeking his consent to write this book. He was wary of an Old
Boy poking around. My intentions, however, were honourable.
I felt that his was the great football story. No other English
football club has given such glorious expression to the game on
the field. Understanding how that was achieved seemed
important, the more so given the wretchedness of the contem-
porary game, bereft as it is of heroes and values of a kind with
which the names Busby and Manchester United are synony-
mous.
Once Sir Matts imprimatur was on this project my task was
eased. His family, friends and the great players who served him
opened up and talked about Busby as never before.
Although Manchester United have not won the First Division
Championship since 1967, the clubs legend remains as strong as
ever in the 1990s. Wherever football is played, the name
2
Manchester United is honoured, as are the names of Matt
Busby, Bobby Charlton, George Best, Denis Law, Duncan
Edwards, Roger Byrne, Eddie Colman and Tommy Taylor.
This great English sporting institution has, uniquely, touched
hearts and minds across the world. Tragedy is evoked as well as
glorious football.
' On 6 February 1958, eight Manchester United players died
or were mortally injured in what people in Manchester simply
call The Crash. The Munich Air Disaster left twenty-three
people dead. Many planes have crashed, costing many more
lives since that day almost thirty-four years ago. Yet, the
Munich Disaster lives poignantly in memory, an afternoon,
like the one on which President Kennedy was assassinated,
when a shadow fell across the world, when something was lost
never to be replaced. Those who saw them claim this was the
greatest team ever to grace the English League. The average
age of that Busby side was twenty-one. Mere boys, they had
won two successive First Division Championships, one of
them by eleven points.
Triumphant at home, this brash, brilliant, outrageously
confident football team from the industrial North set out to
conquer Europe, where no other English club had dared to
venture. The England they left in the Fifties was the drab place
damned by the playwright John Osborne as stultifying,
reactionary, unimaginative and boring. Busbys Red Devils
were the antithesis of this. When they embarked on their
European adventure, English football, reflecting the national
mood, lacked confidence, stood in awe, or pitiful insularity, as
the seemingly invincible Hungarians and Real Madrid lent new
enchantment to the game England had taught the world to play.
The quest for self-respect, restoration of Englands pre-
eminence, led by Busbys young team, had a resonance beyond
football. Their adventure would tell England something about
itself.
The omens were good. United played as magnificently in the
European Champions Cups, with the same verve and irrepres-
sible style, as in domestic competitions. The crusade looked
likely to succeed when these daring young men perished on that
cold Munich afternoon.
3
:
Matt Busby almost died from his multiple injuries. Two
agonising weeks after the crash, Duncan Edwards did. He was
twenty-one.
Busbys club was destroyed at Munich. Ten years later the
next team he created, perhaps the greatest of the three, won the
European Champions Cup at Wembley, a magical goal from
another great player, yet another type, from yet another
generation, Georgie Best securing the trophy the Red Devils
had died pursuing. Manchester United were the first English
team to win the European Cup. A measure of Busbys
achievement is that that statistic, historic though it is, is almost
irrelevant to his story.
In the Sixties United won an FA Cup and two Champion-
ships. The style of Law, Best and Charlton will live in football
folklore as long as the game is played.
Matt Busby was knighted in 1968. In a Gallup Poll in
February 1969 he was voted Britainss seventh most popular
man. Still the man himself remained an enigma. He had never
been on a television chat-show or profiled in any depth in print.
The books were full of football lore, triumphs and defeats,
reports of matches won and lost, results and scorelines. Of him
little was known. People responding to Gallup voted for an
image, an idea about him as represented by the football played
by his teams: gracious, courageous, poignant by virtue of
Munich, glorious, stylish, a nobleman from the world of
professional sport where such are rarely found.
This miners son is the longest-serving professional in the
English game. He started out a young player with Manchester
City in 1928. Sixty-three years later he survives in a sport that
casts off its servants with callous disregard, as of habit. As I
write, in the summer of 1991, thirty professional managers have
been sacked during the season past. Busby survives, the
mystery intact, people still voting for an image.
Who knows Sir Matt Busby, the one great man, in the fullest
sense of that phrase, to emerge from more than a century of
professional soccer in Britain? Those closest to him, the smart, .
the best and brightest of their time, his friends and colleagues,
all argue about him. How did he do it? What is he really like?
4
What is the truth, tantalisingly concealed, of Busbys
Manchester United?
Busby changed the nature of Englands national game. He
was a revolutionary, entering management in 1945 to effect
swift and radical change, taking control of Manchester United,
and in the process defining the role of the manager as Boss
rather than servant. Before that, as a player he had commanded
respect beyond the aspirations of pre-war professional sports-
men. Matt the player was dignified and charismatic; Matt the
manager was powerful, a paternalist in an age of authori-
tarianism. A man of action and a visionary, a football man to
the core, with the bearing and political instinct of a cardinal.
On one level Manchester United is the greatest sports story
in Englands history. On another, more human, level the story
of this great club is a saga of tragedy, betrayal, hurt, bitterness,
ruined lives and careers. Wherever there is glory, power and
wealth one finds such things. In that respect Matt Busbys story
is no different from any other saga.
In his small office, sipping coffee, he is at eighty-two as
immaculately dressed as always: light-brown suit, white shirt
set off by rust coloured silk tie. The shoes, brown patent
leather. Dignity personified. He would co-operate, as would his
family and closest friends with more enthusiasm. They faced a
contradiction, wanting at once to protect him and explain him.
Protect him from what? Those who love him most know how
much Sir Matt hates intrusion, is content to be remembered for
his extraordinary achievements, would wish to remain distant
and dignified. Yet towards the end of a magnificent life there
was disappointment and hurt. This too is part of his story, an
important part, for enabling us to understand, through the life
of English footballs ultimate professional, the true nature of
the game.
Those who wished to protect Sir Matt felt compelled to
explain him because, being football men themselves, they
- understood that Busby was the last great football man, a genius
who gifted greatness to his players, to more of them than any
other man in the history of the game. Hence, the importance of
separating myth from reality, of reconstructing the life as it was
lived rather than as it may be imagined. Seen from inside,
5
Busbys life is even more substantial than the myth. There are
few of whom that can truly be said.
1
Mattha
The menace of the Irish Race to our
Scottish Nationality
Title of pamphlet published by the
General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland in 1923

Matt Busby was born in the Lanarkshire mining village of
Orbiston on 26 May 1909. He was Alexander and Nellie
Busbys first child. A footballer has come into this house
today, Dr Douglas told Nellie as she cradled her firstborn in
her arms. Matts father was a notable footballer in a village
that was proud of its footballers. There were two things above
all in which the men of Orbiston took pride: playing football
and working on the coalface. The harsh unnatural work bred
tough men for whom danger was a fact of everyday life and at
the end of the week their leisure was consumed with appropri-
ate lust. They felt themselves to be apart from other men,
better, more versed in lifes realities, more deserving of the
good times in pubs and dancehalls where for a few hours on
Saturday night the filthy grime and physical stress of the pits
could be forgotten.
Recalling the harsh reality of life in a mining village many
years later, Matt Busby would tell an apocryphal story of two
miners walking to work on a bitterly cold January morning. As
they approached the pit-head a bird sang to greet the dawn.
One of the miners paused, stared at the bird and barked, Ye
- wouldne be sanging sae loud if ye had a pit bonnet on yir heid.
Mining was filthy and dangerous. Football was one antidote,
an escape into daylight and fresh air. In the pit the men lived
like animals, but above ground life was often little better.
Money was a constant source of worry; illness a lingering fear.
7
If you lost your health you lost everything, most tormentingly
the home you lived in. You belonged to the mining company 
everything was theirs except your leisure time.
It was the same for every miner and his family. The most
obvious and profound example of uniform dependence on The
Company was the home you lived in. Matt Busby was born in a
miners cottage in Old Orbiston, three-quarters of a mile from
the town of Bellshill. There were eight pits around the town.
Each pit had its own community divided in sections of thirty-
two cottages, called Miners Rows. There were sixteen dwell-
ings in each row. When Matt was born the cottage the Busbys
lived in was over a hundred years old. There were two rooms, a
kitcheri and a living-room-cum-bedroom, with a cold-water tap
outside. The communal toilets were seventy-five yards away
and on a cold night men didnt always feel inclined to make the
journey. Most families were decent, some werent. People lived
close together, little things distinguished a family. Behaviour
reflected on the household, mattered so much because it was so
easily observed.
Individuality was most commonly the consequence of bad
rather than good behaviour. A man would acquire a reputation
as a fighter or a drinker, maybe as a womaniser. A large spirit,
imprisoned by the uniformity of work and the social conven-
tions of his row, would have no means, other than drink,
aggression or romance, of breaking free of the constraints of
village life, no means other than football of giving expression to
his personality and imagination. Football was the decent mans.
flight from conformity, the way he was known and identified
himself. Football was respectable. Hence, perhaps, Dr
Douglass encouraging words to Nellie Busby. The Busbys
were respectable people, a footballer of local renown would be
no more than they deserved.
While the way a man conducted himself in the village
reflected on the family, the nature of life within the home was
determined by his wife. Alexander Busby was a quiet, genial
man, a big man who didnt throw his weight around. Nellie was
a more vigorous character, a woman of some conviction. The
Busbys were Catholics, Nellie the daughter of Jimmy Greer, an
Irishman whod come to Orbiston to work in the pit and who
8
lived five cottages down the row from Alex and Nellie. Jimmy
was a character. He liked a drink and though his fecklessness
was largely redeemed by a generous nature, he was never
entirely redeemed in Nellies eyes. She resented the torment
her mother had endured when Jimmy spent too much time and
money in the public house. More deeply felt, as she grew up in
Orbiston, was her sense of embarrassment as her father
conformed to the stereotype of Irish Catholic behaviour which
fuelled the racial and religious bigotry that was pervasive at all
levels of Scottish life.
In the community around Bellshill, Catholics and Protestants
lived and worked side by side. The profound philosophical and
theological arguments that led to the Reformation were never
an issue in a mixed working-class village like Orbiston.
Sectarianism focused on everyday existence, on behaviour. The
Reformation was not as bitter for Scottish Catholics as for their
co-religionists in England. Only one person, a Jesuit priest
named John Ogilvie, lost his life, executed at Glasgow Cross in
1615 for treasonable recognition of the Popes spiritual
jurisdiction in the Kings land. Those Scots who remained loyal
to Rome after the Reformation lived mainly in the Highlands
and Isles and around Banff in the north-east of the country. In
the seventeenth century hatred was about religion. Two
hundred years later, when the Irish arrived in Scotland, race
became the issue and anti-Catholicism gained a sinister new
lease of life as the Irish, fleeing the poverty of home, came in
search of work. In the mid-nineteenth century anti-Catholic
riots were a feature of life in the Central Lowlands. The
immigrants were accused of offering scab labour, taking jobs
from native Scots, and with their large and ever increasing
families they were reviled as a burden on the Poor Rates.
The Irish immigrants had no rights  they couldnt vote or
own property  until in the 1820s the Irish Catholic leader,
- Daniel OConnell, began to campaign for civil rights for
Catholics in the United Kingdom. Opposition to this campaign
was most virulent in Scotland, yet, supported by moderate
Protestants and, notably, by the liberal newspaper the
Scotsman, OConnell was successful, and in 1829 King George
9

es
III reluctantly signed the Emancipation Act, which allowed
Catholics most of the civil rights enjoyed by other citizens.
In an essay published in 1973 the religious historian the
Reverend Ian Muirhead pointed out that, had they been
offered a referendum in 1829, the Scots would have emphati-
cally rejected Catholic Emancipation. Hatred of Catholics was
most intense north of the border, and worst of all on the west
coast of Scotland where the Irish had settled. Emancipation was
deemed athreat to the Protestant way of life. One of many
popular anti-Popery broadsheets of the time felt obliged to
warn its Protestant readers that: We shall have a Popish
Government; a Popish Parliament; a Popish Provost, Popish
Magistrates, Popish Lords of Session, Popish Patrons of
Churches, Popish Professors in the colleges, Popish school-
masters in every parish, if once we suffer the barriers of the
Protestant Constitution to be broken down.
In the decade following the Emancipation Act Anti-
Romanism grew in intensity. The arrival of the Irish  men like
Jimmy Greer  exacerbated the problems in Scotland. Another
expert on Popular Protestantism in Victorian Britain, Professor
Geoffrey Best, notes that once Parliament had lifted the
restrictions on Catholics, Anglicans and Non-Conformists felt
vulnerable and were therefore more ready to support a
vigorous anti-Popery movement. The festering sore became
uglier, more visible. In 1850 there were anti-Catholic riots in
Greenock and elsewhere, provoked by John Sayers Orr, a
notorious anti-Catholic demagogue, widely known as the
Angel Gabriel for his histrionic performances. In a publication
called Bulwark the Reverend James Begg, the author of a
Handbook of Popery, attacked Catholics in verse:
They say the clouds of Papal Rome
Are rolling oer our land
But this we know our hearts are fixed
And firm shall be our stand.

Fixed hearts begot clenched fists on the streets of Glasgow and
in Bellshill, eight miles away. In the neighbouring town of
Coatbridge there was a six-day riot between Protestants and
Catholics in 1883. According to the Reverend Muirhead, Anti-
10
Catholicism was the anti-semitism of the liberal. There were
few liberals at street level. There, prejudice had little to do with
liturgy, whether or not you were loyal to the King or to Rome.
Loyalism and Catholicism were merely badges of identity
reflecting differences of character rather than religious belief.
In the Protestant psyche Papists were feckless, sly, weak, too
fond of drink, unable to control themselves, least of all in the
matter of sex. Catholics were uneducated, and irresponsible.
They lived for the day. They could sin and gain easy forgiveness
in confession. To Protestants this Holy Catholic Sacrament was
a joke.
Catholics knew the Protestants to be a harder breed. Prods
saved their pennies, worked harder, were neat and clean. And
joyless.
Among devout Catholics a more malicious myth flourished,
the notion that Protestants were to be pitied. The Prods have
abandoned the one True Faith  we should pray for them. In
1886 Pope Leo XIII declared the Anglican rite of ordination,
wholly invalid and null. Three years later he issued a papal
letter, Caritatis Studium, addressed to Scotland. Noting that
the majority of Scots were Presbyterians, Leo regretted more
_and more the unhappy state of so many people who lack the
Christian faith in its entirety. He prayed that one day
Protestants might be willing to join us in restoring the
communion of one and the same faith. Rescuing the fallen
Prods was deemed by Leo to be the big project.
Pope Leo was as irrelevant to everyday life in Bellshill as his
extremist Protestant counterparts, the frenzied orators of the
Orange Order. Ordinary decent Catholics had no mission to
convert their Protestant neighbours while most Protestants
were content to allow their Catholic neighbours to live free of
persecution. As Stolthers 1911 edition of social life in Glasgow,
Lanarkshire and Renfrew observed, sectarianism was not the
only coinage of the day. Two years after Matt Busby was born,
Stolthers, a Protestant publication, spoke of the laudable
efforts, noble ambitions and high character of the St Vincent
De Paul Society and thanked Catholics involved in public
bodies for their efforts to obliterate those differences and
suspicions that, unfortunately, at one time prevailed. Such
11
men, Stolthers went on, were true patriotic citizens. Men and
women.
Nellie Busby had noble ambitions. Character, high and low,
was formed in the home. Religion was a private matter. But
there were other matters of importance, education being in her
mind the most important of all. From education would flow
enlightenment, respect for yourself and for your neighbour.
Three daughters, Delia, Kathy and Margaret were born to Alex
and Nellie between 1911 and the outbreak of the First World
War in 1914.
The Busbys cottage was crowded, but a warm and tranquil
refuge from the world outside. Nellies father had little interest
in football. Jimmy was expansive as only the Irish can be, the
old live-for-the-day man, a product of his times. Alex took his
pleasure in football, his home and his family. He shared Nellies
convictions about education. In this both the Busbys reflected
the moderate, progressive aspirations of Catholics of their
generation. The fecklessness of the past was rejected. From the
pennies of the poor the Church built its own elementary
schools and paid for the training of its own teachers. Acknow-
ledging this Stolthers Guide remarked upon the praiseworthy
efforts of Catholics on schoolboards who receive nothing from
the rates in support of their schools  their own people having to
contribute to these rates  [yet] they support any expenditure
well directed in the interest of education.
Catholics were at this time Scotlands largest minority. By
1850 there were about 200,000 Irish residents in Scotland, most -
of them Catholic, the minority Protestant and therefore
welcome. The Catholic descendents of those immigrants like
Alex and Nellie Busby were faced with a critical choice,
assimilate or agitate. Those who chose to do the latter uttered
the Fenian rhetoric of Irish Republicanism. On a Saturday
night in Glasgow or Bellshill drink would lead to rebel songs,
then, from the opposite corner of the street, the Pope would be
fucked. Thus battle between Tim and Blue Nose would
ensue. Prejudice would harden. To this tendency Jimmy Greer
was sympathetic. Alex and Nellie Busby were not.
They sought a new life. Rejecting sectarianism, they wished
12
to assimilate. They and their children were Scots, proud of their
origins but aware that self-respect  and the respect of the wider
community  could not be won in hostile exchanges on street
corners after the pubs closed on a Saturday night. Education
offered the opportunity for real advancement; agitation was a
blind alley. Nor did it make sense to a man like Alex Busby who
worked alongside Protestants in the pit and played football with
them at weekends.
In 1914 young Matt started school at Rothwell St Brides. He
was a well-mannered and clever boy, and if his mother worried
about her Mattha it was because of the company he kept, in
particular Frank Rogers, a wild young fellow whose family were
notorious Fenian agitators. Football was the bond between
Frank and Mattha, yet Nellie thought young Rogers a bit of a
blackguard, and feared the influence he might have on her son.
The imminent war was, however, a more profound source of
worry. Alex had decided to volunteer to fight the Germans.
Any doubts he and other Catholic men may have harboured
about fighting for King and country, and such doubts were few
for this was regarded as a just and popular conflict, dissolved
when a letter from Archbishop John Maguire of Glasgow was
read out at Mass one Sunday. Maguire urged his flock to go to
the front against the evil Germans.
Thus, with a mixture of pride and foreboding Nellie and her
children saw Alex and his fellow villagers  Catholic and
Protestant  off to war.
A consoling thought for Nellie was that the men would return
as they left, together, for bigotry would be less profitable once
victory had been achieved. That largely unspoken hope was
voiced shortly after hostilities began by Professor J. S.
Phillimore, a convert and one of the Catholic Churchs leading
intellectuals. Scottish Catholics would gain much from being
loyal combatants, Phillimore claimed. When the war was over
soldiers would come home bringing stories of what priests and
nuns did on the battlefields. There would, he asserted, be a
complete revolution of feeling in Scotlands attitude to
Catholics.
Alex Busby was killed by a snipers bullet at Arras in 1916.
13
ae

Over forty years later Matt Busby would recall how un-
protected he felt at the loss of his father. There was, he
reflected, a gap in the life of a boy without a father when all the
other boys around him could talk about theirs and incessantly
did. He felt that the death of his father as he approached his 
seventh birthday induced in him some paternal, protective
feeling to other unfortunate, sensitive young people. Of the
Busby men, only Matt and Jimmy Greer survived the First
World War. The war that was to end all wars had claimed the
lives of all the menfolk in the family. History would mock the
claim that the Great War would end all wars. Nor was the
_ Britain the fighting men returned to the land fit for heroes that
had been promised. Economic depression led to unemploy-
ment, which, in Scotland, pitched young Catholics against
Protestants in the search for scarce jobs. In those desperate
circumstances another pre-war promise was shown to be
hollow: the notion that by volunteering for the frontlines
Catholics would still the clamour of the bigots. The Busbys,
having sacrificed so much, remained members of a despised
minority.
Perversely, after the war sectarianism increased and became
respectable. In 1923 the General Assembly of the Church of
Scotland published a pamphlet, The Menace of the Irish Race
to our Scottish Nationality, which accepted that Orange or
Protestant Irishmen could be assimilated but asserted that the
Catholic immigrant stock cannot be assimilated or absorbed
into the Scottish race. They remain a people by themselves,
segregated by reason of their race, their customs, and are
gradually and inevitably dividing Scotland racially, socially and
ecclesiastically.
Religious persecution was a fact of daily life for Nellie Busby
and her family. If in later life Matt Busby felt protective to those
vulnerable and sensitive and if, as he did, he came to detest
bullying, his experiences of bigotry and intolerance in his
formative years helps us understand why.
The swelling tide of Protestant bigotry touched all Catholic
lives. Young unemployed Catholics seeking work would be
weeded out by questions such as, What school did you go to?
Were you in the Boys Brigade? and Who was your Sunday
14
7 School teacher? Faced with this type of provocation Catholics
responded in differing ways. In the Rogers family, along the
row of cottages from the Busbys, bitterness was the self-
defeating consequence of bigotry. Intolerance begot spite and
hatred. Matts friend Frank Rogers burned with rage, seeking
any opportunity to confront the Blue Nosed bastards in his
village. When they went looking for trouble, Frank and his
equally belligerent brothers were as feared in their own
community as they were by neighbouring Protestants. People
stood aside when, usually on Saturday nights, the Rogers boys
marched aggressively into Bellshill. Only one young man could
reason with them.
When Matt Busby cautioned against bitterness Frank tended
to listen. Dont play into their hands, Matt would plead with his
friend, youre only letting yourself down. Coming from some-
_ body else this advice would have carried little force. But Matt
- was different. The Busbys were respected on Miners Row.
They were decent, generous neighbours. Nellie and her
children had borne the loss of Alex and the other men with
admirable stoicism. Nellie had been given a job at the pit-head
to supplement her widows pension. Respect was compounded
by affection, this being due in no small measure to Jimmy Greer
and Matt, the surviving male members of the family.
With Nellie working at the pit, Jimmy spent his days caring
for Delia, Kathy and Margaret. He was still the rascal drinker,
still the expansive character who would appear on the doorstep
of his cottage in his long-johns and hail Mattha to leave his
- football game and fetch a pitcher of beer from the village
saloon. If Nellie represented the serious, responsible, conscien-
tious face of Catholicism in Old Orbiston, Jimmy, tolerably
dissolute, vouched for the familys street credibility, forming a
human bridge between the Busbys and the Rogers. When as a
teenager Matt remonstrated with Frank, the rough young
diamond paid heed; Jimmy Greers grandson was no goody-
goody, no preacher talking for talkings sake. Respect was
Jimmys legacy to young Mattha.
The death of his father thrust new responsibilities on Matt.
Some of the gaiety of childhood was gone. He was his mothers
ally now, her partner as much as her son, so while other young
15
lads dallied after school Matt hurried back to the cottage to help
Jimmy with his sisters and the household chores. He learned to
cope around the house, to light a fire, shop, and soothe a young
girls cries. He had always looked older than his years, now he
had to act that way too. Jimmy and Matt grew close those
afternoons. At times an odd role reversal caused them to laugh,
as the older man feigned irresponsibility to tease a rebuke from
his earnest grandson. Och, come on wee Mattha, your mother
willnae knoo, Jimmy would chuckle as he proposed some
conspiratorial short-cut around their domestic duties. Thus,
gently, laughter returned to the Busbys cottage to ease the pain
of Alexs passing. A joke shared, the work done, Mattha would
take aff to play football with his pals. Later in his distinguished
life Matt Busby would be accused of being too tolerant of
rogues. He was, perhaps, acknowledging an important debt.
In 1919 Nellie married Harry Matthie whom shed met while
working at the Colliery. Although he never talked about it,
except perhaps to Jimmy Greer, there was always a feeling in
the family that Mattha resented the new presence in his cottage.
Matt had done well at St Brides. The school principal advised
Nellie to send the boy to Motherwell Higher Grade, the best
second level college within reach. Such a recommendation was
not lightly made as sending a boy to college for five years
entailed sacrifices for a family. Scarce money would have to be
spent on clothes and books and there was the loss of the wage-
packet most young men in Bellshill brought home when they
started working at fourteen. It was almost certainly with the
1918 Education Act in mind that the teachers at St Brides chose
- Matt Busby for educational advancement. As part of that Act
the State and the Catholic Church reached agreement on the
controversial question of whether or not Catholics should be
allowed to run their own schools. Non-denominational school-
ing would expose Catholics to an alien doctrine, the Hierarchy
argued, and if the Catholic ethos was to be preserved, religious
teaching must be part of the curriculum in schools and colleges.
The Catholic school would become an extension of both the 
home and the parish in the formation of Catholic character.
Before the 1918 Act Catholics who progressed to second
level education were at risk, exposed to the mores of the non-
Catholic majority. The States concession meant that the
16
.
a

brightest young Catholics could now  with the Churchs
guidance  aspire to the professions and higher trades without
losing their identity. The primary school teachers task was to
find the best and brightest children and urge their parents to
make the necessary sacrifices to ensure that Catholics would
climb the social ladder from the ghetto to the middle classes.
- It was for this cause that twelve-year-old Matt set off from the
cottage in Old Orbiston shortly after seven oclock each
weekday morning to walk the five miles to Motherwell. Every
day for the next three years, except on precious holidays, Matt
braved the elements, a pioneer for his class and his creed. Soon
two more children were born to Nellie and Harry; a son,
Jimmy, and a daughter, Ellen. As a nipper young Jimmy
remembers running the two hundred yards to the turn off from
the main MotherwellGlasgow road every evening to wait for
Matt who would hoist him on his shoulders and carry him home.
Matt was an unusual boy, composed and mature, serene
almost at times, and he stood out at college. He was a diligent
scholar, yet somehow distant in a way other pupils and teachers
could never fathom. A popular, affable lad, Matt could, at the
same time, seem detached in a way that some found intimidat-
ing, others simply curious. He was not what the more socially
conscious teachers imagined a colliers son would be. He had,
without the slightest sense of affectation, a certain quality, an
elan, that was extraordinary in a teenage boy. The headmaster,
Mr Bennett, took special note of this lad from Bellshill.
The aura around Matt Busby was natural. If there was within
him any sense of being different it was due to football. The
district of Bellshill was renowned for its footballers: by 1923 the
names of Jimmy McMullen, Alex James and Hughie Gallacher
were famous in the newspapers. All three came from Bellshill.
McMullen, James and Gallacher would later play in the
greatest Scottish team of all time, the Wee Wembley Wizards
that beat England 5-2 at Wembley in 1928. Tales of their
deeds, and memories, fresh and vivid, of seeing them play on
the football pitch that lay in the shadow of the pit-bing in Old
Orbiston, filled the villagers with more than pride. The bing, a
large black mound of disused coal-slack, was the ugly symbol of
this and all other mining villages. This filthy waste reminded
17
them of what their lives were about, of the grime and squalor
that governed village life.
Village pride was the memory of Alex James playing here,
the thought that a rare beauty, which had resonance in the
world far beyond this bleak terrain, had been conceived and
nurtured beneath their own bing. Men like James, Gallacher
and McMullen were more than heroes; they carved a space for
Orbiston. and Bellshill in the world, creating an identity for their
community, a sense of pride, a sense of romance, a sense that
what was precious was within reach, a rare exhilarating glimpse
of something wonderful and glorious which was accessible to all
who had known them or their families in a way that other
things, perhaps equally desirable, were not.
To outsiders Old Orbiston was known as Cannibal Island,
partly because of the fierceness of its men playing football,
partly because of the stark landscape; the humble Miners Rows
dwarfed by the dark sulking bings. Partly, too, because of the
malevolent undercurrents of Catholic/Protestant hostility
which could, on any drinking night, burst into a torrent of
violence and hatred. To those who lived in the cottages, Old
Orbiston was the place where Alex James, Jimmy McMullen
and Hughie Gallacher created beauty. Beauty to which people
responed. Even so that even those who couldnt play would be
touched, spiritually, ina way few preachers of dogma could
match, and would be better for the experience.
Young Matt Busby had never visited an art gallery, listened
to Beethoven or Mozart, or read the poetry of Byron, but he
knew what beauty was, knew what man was capable of, knew of
the wonders of imagination, and knew that he could express
himself through the delightful, accessible language of football.
If there was an uncanny self-assurance about the boy from
Cannibal Island, football was the source.
Like most young boys in mining villages and city ghettos,
Matt discovered the ball almost as soon as he could walk. At
first this piece of rubber was whimsical, elusive, teasing, a
private challenge. It ran away and made you chase it, made a
fool of you, seemed to have a mind of its own. There was life in
this thing, mysterious, seductive life. Slowly you began to
understand the mystery. You began to exercise control, you
tasted power, perhaps, for the first time. You knew a certain
18
secret satisfaction. Then you joined the others, testing your
power against theirs. In this way you learned about yourself and
about them. You took communion without liturgy or dogma.
The ball was more than a toy, it was a divine invention, an
instrument that required of its players sensitivity and imagina-
tion. Naked aggression led only to torment. The brute was
never rewarded, was indeed made to look foolish when he tried
to bully the ball; the hero was the man who possessed wit and
nerve, who harnessed his power to spirit and mind, creating the
most wonderful theatre in the most unlikely setting.
Matt Busby fell in love with football when he first watched his
father play. He quickly mastered the ball. Then he took the next
steps; out to join the other boys on the street, a sense of belonging
there, losing inhibitions, taking stock, measuring yourself against
them in a way that transcended other ways of keeping the score
like school, money, possessions, the way you looked, the clothes
you wore. If you could play this game the hole in the arse of your
trousers didnt matter, no more than your buck-teeth or the acne
on your skin. To master football was to escape the material world,
the uncertainties, the frustration, the pain.
For Matt Busby, the boy without a father, sensitive to the
incessant chatter of other boys about their dads, football was
always more than a game.
Alex James was Matts first hero. As a teenager James played
for Old Orbiston Celtic when Matt was the teams hamper-boy,
charged with looking after the stockings, knickers and jerseys,
and the footballs, which were in those days a scarce, precious
commodity. Before the match Matt would collect the gear and
hand each player his strip. Afterwards the mucky, sweat-stained
jerseys, shorts and stockings would be packed away and delivered
to the lady who washed them. This was a dream assignment for a
lad, a chance to get the feel of the glory game from the inside, to
glimpse the heroes, smell the liniment, inhale the intoxicating
mixture of apprehension and excitement in the dressing-room
before a game. To be known by name to Alex James. One day,
when Jamess boots got lost, Matt solved the problem by racing
the two hundred yards to the cottage to fetch his own  they were a
perfect fit for the little genius.
19
In almost every way James embodied footballs magical
attraction for the working man. In civies he looked ordinary;
small at five feet five inches, unprepossessing, just another
miners son. He took the field wearing long, baggy shorts that
billowed down around his knees. He was anything but athletic, -
an eccentric waif amid the purposeful muscularity of those
around him. He was Everyman, the baggy shorts that looked
too big for him made him seem more vulnerable and out of
place. He was the little guy all could identify with. The pleasure
of seeing him triumph was sublime. To the otherwise undistin-
guished gathering which massed on the touchlines to watch Old
Orbiston Celtic, in the shadow of the black pit-head bing which
stood as a monument to the harsh futility of their working lives,
Alex James was an inspiring sight. For once the contest began
he was no longer ordinary or frail. He was the master;
audacious, elusive, seeing moves nobody else could see; here, a
miraculous escape from the flailing boots of bigger men who,
being so impressive when theyd confidently strolled out onto
the pitch, were now left floundering desperately in the little
guys wake; there, a deadly pass delivered with cold precision
into the path of a colleague racing free in open space. A feint, a
drop of the shoulder, a teasing little shuffle of the hips and those
apparently powerful opponents were confused, rendered
impotent for all to see. Football played with such wit and grace
by this unlikely hero aroused the deepest passions in those who
witnessed it. For he was one of them, the hero Everyman in a
parable about power and powerlessness which the watching
men understood. His victory was theirs, his wit, daring and
grace was theirs as well, the beauty that lay beneath the grimy
surface of life in a mining village. Football was theatre and even
those who couldnt play were part of the story. The line
between hero and audience was thin. Only the ball separated
James from those who worshipped him. Only the ball.
Small boys and grown men drifted away from the football
ground to talk and dream about the wonder of the afternoon.
James soon went on to fame with Preston North End, Arsenal
and Scotland. Hughie Gallacher and Jimmy McMullen went as
well. News of their deeds filtered back to Old Orbiston and
Bellshill when, in the bitter years of the early Twenties which
20
were the prelude to the Jarrow Hunger March and the General
Strike of 1926, there was little else to be proud of. Fears of
hunger and unemployment in those years were real, and Harry
Matthie and Nellie began to think about emigrating to
America. The widows of most of the Busby men had gone to the
States after the war, and the news they sent back was
encouraging: America offered opportunity. Where you came
from, what religion you practised made no difference. This was
a new country, free of bigotry and want. There seemed nothing
to keep them back  but Mattha.
Matt didnt want to go. Nellie didnt want to leave him
behind. He was fifteen. Although he was doing well at college
he had no real academic ambition. His dreams were about
football and he had more reason that most to dream. He and
Frank Rogers were the two best young footballers in the district
of Bellshill. As boys of eleven or twelve Matt and Frank had
played with the men in the improvised games in the village.
They were the two to watch according to Bellshill gossip, the
two who would surely follow James, McMullen and Gallacher
to glory  they were heroes-in-waiting who had already tasted
local fame. They had moved from rubber ball to leather, from
the street to the pitch with proper lines and goalposts, a referee
and corner-flags.
The fantastic dreams, the imaginings of the pillow on which
boys fell asleep at night were of goals scored and cunningly
flighted passes, of heroic dribbling, the flawless performance in
which ball and opposition were mastered as never before. Part of
the magic was aesthetic; the feel of a jersey on your back, a proper
jersey with colour, a collar and cuffs; the fresh white shorts, the
clean stockings, the boots shining and neatly laced; the smell of
leather off a real football. The move from rubber to leather, from
street to pitch inspired other dreams; of Hampden Park,
Wembley, of the great stadiums in cities like London, Manchester
and Birmingham. America did not feature in Matthas dreams.
But as he fell asleep at night he heard the talk of emigration to a
_ Jand that held no promise for him.
The first step towards the emigration ship was taken when it
was decided that he would leave Motherwell Higher Grade.
The alternative was to stay in college until he was eighteen and
21
another three years on the road had no appeal for Matt. When
he delivered the message to Mr Bennett, the headmaster
travelled to Orbiston to plead with Nellie. This was a great
mistake, he said. Matt would make a splendid teacher. His
future was assured. But Nellie explained that the family had
already applied for visas to the States. There was no future for
them in Orbiston, she said, no way they could wait another
three years while Matt finished his schooling. Football wasnt
mentioned. The arguments were economic and unanswerable.
But while Mr Bennett sadly accepted the inevitable, Nellie was
less successful with her son. Matt didnt want to go to America
-if money was the problem he would earn it down the pit. The
US visas would take six months to come through and every
pound would matter to pay for the trip, he reminded his
mother. Knowing this was true, Nellie was forced, like Mr
Bennett, to accept the inevitable. Matt had already bought time
and the pit was the lesser of two evils. When, six months later,
the family sat down to make the decision about emigration,
Matt, the wage-earning coalface worker, was a much more
formidable proposition than the reluctant schoolboy who had
originally demurred. The trip into the unknown, always fraught
with risk and heartache, was now indefinitely postponed.
Matts opposition proved decisive. Jimmy Greer, not wishing to
lose another daughter, was once again his silent ally and Harry
Matthie understood that the blood of family was thicker than
the water of marital love. This unspoken truth widened the gap
between step-father and son. Nellie had been loyal to her own,
Mattha could now shape his own destiny.
At midnight on 3 May 1926 the General Strike began. The
world fit for heroes for which Alex Busby and his comrades had
died had not materialised, least of all for Britains miners. A
contemporary English magazine describes the standard of living
of miners and their families as being little better than that of
brow-beaten coolies in the colonies. The squalor and filth which
had at one time been tolerable grew less so in the Twenties when
glimpses of a better, cleaner, brighter world filtered through to
mining villages via newsreels, films and print media. Colour
printing was common by the early Twenties, magazines like Boys
Own Paper, Famous Novel Magazine and Popular Gardening
22
used colour extensively. Popular Gardenings issue of October
1925 offered a beautiful art supplement in colour. Comics
proliferated, many from America. Their engaging heroes, like
those in Boys Own, a British paper for school-boys of all ages,
were clean-limbed, well-dressed role models for the young lads in
pit-villages who excitedly consumed these images of another
world. Silent movie stars like Ronald Colman played their part in
the awakening of the working classes. Romance and adventure
seemed more accessible.
The role of advertising in creating a new consciousness of
lifes possibilities is, perhaps, the most ironic phenomenon of
this period. H. H. Harriss advertising poster for Bovril in 1923
was to become anational institution. A contented, well-fed
man was, in this colourful print, depicted sitting on a jar of
Bovril riding the ocean waves. Bovril, the caption read,
prevents that sinking feeling. The words sinking feeling were
underlined. Other ads, for Nestles or Cadburys Milk
Chocolate touted other images of men and women contented
by consumerism.
The contrast between this imagined world and the urban
slums and Miners Rows never seemed more stark than in the
bitter months before the General Strike was called. The British
mining industry was suffering keen competition from Europe.
Traditional markets were being captured by France, Germany
and Poland. The Sankey Report of 1919 had recommended that
British mine-owners spend more money modernising pits and
investing in new machinery, but the owners ignored the Report,
and by 1926 the mines were uncompetitive. A Royal Commis-
sion headed by Sir Herbert Samuel was appointed. It found that
three-quarters of British coal was being produced ata loss; the
miners were paid too much and the mine-owners were taking
too much profit. Nationalisation was recommended. Tory
Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin turned down nationalisation,
ignored the mine-owners profits and backed their claim that
miners wages be cut by thirteen and a half per cent. He also
agreed with the owners that the miners should work longer
hours to help solve the general economic problems of the
country. The TUC responded by calling the General Strike.
Arthur J. Cook, the miners leader, declared not a minute on
23
the day, not a penny off the pay. He asked that miners be given
safety in the pits, be allowed proper compensation, fair working
hours and decent living conditions.
For a brief period before the fateful day in early May the air
in Bellshill, as elsewhere, was heady with the scent of justice
and victory through solidarity. Britain rang with the sound of
great oratory which spoke seductively of freedom, equality,
justice and vindication for the oppressed. The most oppressed,
the miners, took heart as their fellow workers in other unions
downed tools, declaring they would fight to the end. Industrial
workers left the factories. Railwaymen and other transport
workers ground their vehicles to a halt. Printers and other
craftsmen joined the crusade.
The government, however, had made extensive preparations
to counter what it described in newspaper notices as an
Organised Attempt to Starve the Nation. Troops, naval forces
and thousands of special constables were placed on alert. A
volunteer strike-breaking force was formed to maintain essen-
tial services. The government took various emergency powers
which virtually amounted to martial law. Britain was polarised
in a way that would have seemed unimaginable (except in the
minds of revolutionaries) a year before. This was class war.
When the TUC tried. to ensure food supplies reached the
strikers, particularly those isolated in mining villages, the
government called out the Army. This show of force, ostensibly
to keep power and communications going, was intimidating.
Worse were the actions of the middle and upper classes who, in
their tens of thousands, volunteered to do the strikers jobs.
Popular newspapers were used as propaganda sheets by the
government. Truculent Churchill, editor of the governments
own news sheet, the British Gazette, seemed to many of those
whod left their work to the clarion call for justice to be
speaking for the nation when he depicted the strikers as the
enemy supported by Reds and all the other odds and sods
within spitting distance. The British Gazettes invective was not
simply directed at the enemy but at the BBC whose news
service under Reith seemed to be too impartial for Churchill 
this despite the fact that the Corporation gave no radio time to
the strike leaders.
24
p Baldwin was, not surprisingly, confident and refused to
negotiate. The General Strike, begun with such eptaisny,
lasted nine days. It was a humiliating defeat.
The miners were deserted, the heady air of 3 May quickly
evaporated. In its place a sour musk, the smell of stale, empty
rhetoric, of promises broken, of solidarity pledged but not
forthcoming. Alone, hungry and pitiful, the miners stayed on
strike until November, easy prey for the government. The word
went out; there would be no concessions, no pity, no mercy for
the people in the mining villages. They would be driven back
underground. Starved, their spirits broken, the men of Bellshill
began to drift back to the pit-head, among them Mattha Busby.
He had learned a lesson . . . about trust and loyalty, about
rhetoric and promise, about family and community, most
profoundly about power and powerlessness.
Football continued to sustain young Mattha. He had progres-
sed from the village team to the best youth side in the district,
Alpine Villa. Along with his pal Frank Rogers, Mattha helped
Villa win the Scottish Under-18 Cup, a proud achievement even
for a community as steeped as Bellshill was in soccer folklore.
The celebrations were held at the Bellshill Miners Club and it
was here that Matt met and fell in love with Jean Menzies. Jean
was a pretty, vivacious girl who stood out as Mattha himself did.
They began walking out, and discovered they shared more than
their love. Jean was a foster-child, born with the family name
Macvie, who had been fostered to the Menzies as a baby. When
her real parents decided they wanted her back Jean had chosen to
stay with the Menzies, who became her adopted family. Neither
Mattha nor Jean took family life for granted. The bond this
created between them was more profound than teenage love.
They knew the pain of loneliness and insecurity which could lie
beneath the surface of a dashing young hero, Mattha the
footballer, and a pretty, glad young girl, Jean. Each private, each
vulnerable, their love deepened, their friendship grew, a rare
empathy rapidly bound each to the other. But Matt and Jeans
love was fraught with danger. The Menzies were Protestants.
Worse, Jeans adoptive mother was the Secretary of the Bellshill
Orange Lodge. She came from the Palace a bastion of the most
intractable anti-Catholic Protestantism, and though her people
25
were miners too, that fact didnt ease their fears. Bigotry was
most intense among the Protestant working class. Some sense
of Mattha and Jeans dread is gleaned from a scene in No Mean
City, the classic early Twenties novel set in Glasgows slumland.
Johnnie is Protestant, Bobbie Hurley a Catholic, Mary the
object of their desire. Johnnie admits on the dance floor Ahm
no so good as Bobbie and you know it. But Hurleys a Catholic
all the same, Mary. You and me are Protestants.
Too bliddy true, we are! she fervently agrees.
Catholics are awright but its best to settle doon wi one of
your ain kind.
And that was putting it mildly.
Mattha had made up his mind. His younger brother, Jimmy,
remembers the atmosphere when Nellie was informed and
asked to invite Jean to the cottage for tea. Matt was shaking,
Jimmy remembers. Ive seen him before big football matches
but believe me he was quaking that night. The house was
cleaned from top to bottom and we were all togged out in our
Sunday best. This first hurdle was comfortably cleared. Nellie
loved Jean whom she described as a right decent girl. This was,
nevertheless, a remarkable match for its times.
After Alpine Villas triumph in the Scottish Under-18 Cup
Frank Rogers and Mattha were invited to join the junior club,
Denny Hibs, thus following their heroes Alex James and Jimmy
McMullen. Junior football in Scotland was open-aged and
highly competitive, the breeding ground which had produced
the great Scottish players now distinguished in the game at
home and in England. This, more than the money allowed in
Junior football, excited Frank and Mattha and they shone
brightly in the junior game, so brightly that within a couple of
months both of them said farewell to Bellshill and headed for
Manchester to try to emulate Jimmy McMullen, by then
Manchester Citys and Scotlands left-half. For Mattha the
dream which had become a plan was now realised. The only
ache in his heart was the leaving of Jean. He would, he
promised, be back for her. She pledged to wait for that day.
2
Manchester
This is a dispute between masters
and servants.
C. E. Sutcliffe, FA Council member,
on attempts to form a Players Union
in 1908

Matt Busby arrived in Manchester in February 1928. He had-by
no means led a sheltered life, but was a mature eighteen-year-
old, hardened by life in Cannibal Island. Football had been a
romance, an escape from reality. That it would no longer be. As
a professional, football would be his reality. What had been a
release from obligation became a way of life to which all other
things must be subservient. The days of dreaming were over.
Professional soccer is a cruel, sometimes seedy game. Soccer
still delighted those who watched and was, to the citizens of
Manchester as to the crowds who packed the touchlines in
Orbiston, theatre, enriching and illuminating lives which were
otherwise drab. That was its glory. That was what the news-
papers wrote about. Few dwelt on the shame that lay behind the
glorious fagade. The truth, obscured if not altogether hidden
from public view, was to dawn on Matt Busby during his first
few months in Manchester, and the lessons he learned then
would be repeated in various forms throughout his playing
career. These facts of professional football life would be the
formative influence on Matt Busby. There was no place better
than Manchester to begin to understand Englands national
game. The conventional wisdom of the 1990s is that money has ~
ruined soccer, that the greed of contemporary players and their
agents is a cancer that is destroying the game. The truth is that
professional football was deformed at birth. The game was
never honourable, never decent, never rational or just. Class
27


was the root of all professional footballs evils: those who
played the game for money, the heroes who drew the crowds,
were working class; those who administered the game, the
directors and football club shareholders, were, as the greatest
player of the age, Billy Meredith, contemptuously described
them, little shopkeepers who govern our destiny. The conflict
between heroes and shopkeepers was about the nature of the
game which had captured the peoples imagination. Was it a
business or a sport? Or both? Could business and sport be
reconciled? And, of most concern to Meredith and his fellow
professionals, how should they be rewarded? Should foot-
ballers wages be controlled, as the Football Association had
decreed in 1900 when a ceiling of 4 a week, including bonuses,
had been set, or should men who were obliged to dedicate their
lives to this game be free as others were to offer their labour to
the highest bidder? When they imposed the maximum wage,
compounding the error with an accompanying clause in players
contracts which bound them to their employer for the duration
of their sporting lives, the little shopkeepers committed foot-
balls Original Sin.
Billy Merediths contempt was well deserved. He knew as
well as those who governed football that the prohibitions placed
on professional players were rendered even more hypocritical
when set against the values preached by the entrepreneurial
classes of Victorian and Edwardian Britain. The virtues of
enterprise and free market forces, of sacrifice and hard work
rewarded, were not, it seems, to extend to the business of
football. And football was a business, theatre for the masses
who packed the grounds, paying their hard earned money to do
so. In Manchester the game aroused extraordinary passion. For
men working in invariably harsh conditions, in engineering
plants or railway yards, in the docks or the cotton mills, football
was a heavenly respite from their daily toil. Whether they
followed United or City these sons of immigrants were offered
something less obvious but more precious than entertainment;
a means of identifying with the city that was their home.
Football enabled those who watched it in Manchester in the
early years of the twentieth century to come together as
Mancunians. They flocked from Salford, Ardwick, Chorlton,
28
Coilyhurst, Gorton and Stretford, Denton and Longsight, from
all corners of the city, seeking sport but finding something they
needed even more  a sense of their own community. These
mens fathers had come to Manchester to survive poverty and
starvation. Success had meant a meal on the table and a roof
over your familys heads. Squalor and desperation were old
acquaintances. To be a Mancunian was to know these things. A
certain humanity existed in this labouring city. You helped your
neighbour when you could, and though nobody had much, what
they had they tried to share. A family wasnt judged by what
they possessed, rather by how they responded to the hardship
next door. Poverty could turn hearts cold, but it hadnt in
Cottonopolis, and the people were proud of that. They had
survived. Together.
Mancunians were a special breed, circumstances had deter-
mined that. They were generous. Generosity had been a
currency in each community, but each community was separate
 until football drew the city together. Watching football the
man from Gorton stood next to the man from Chorlton, docker
stood beside mill-worker, the man from the locomotive works
cheered as lustily as the fellow who made machine tools. For the
sons of Irish immigrants and Scots, for those whose families had
migrated to Manchester from the rural parishes of East Anglia,
via London and the Ship Canal, for all who were unsure of what
they were, who'd broken free of their roots in order to survive,
and now, having done so, were desperate to belong, football
offered a unique opportunity to discover and declare a sense of
civic pride.
And no footballer generated greater civic pride than Billy
Meredith, the Wizard, professional footballs first great star.
Born in the South Wales mining village of Chirk in 1874, he
went to work on the coalface at the age of twelve. He joined
Ardwick, later to become Manchester City, in 1894. From the
outside-right position he both made and scored goals. He
played until his fiftieth year, making 857 League appearances,
scoring 281 goals. Over the course of this long career Meredith
won fifty-one caps for Wales, scoring ten goals. The wizard of
national renown, he appeared in films, on the stage and in
advertisements endorsing everything from football boots to
29
Oxo and herbal remedies. He also ran various businesses, none
of them with any great success. In Manchester he was a folk-
hero, the tooth-pick that was always in his mouth his trademark
in the game.
In 1904 when Billy Meredith led Manchester City to win the
FA Cup, 20,000 Mancunians made the journey to Crystal
Palace to see him score the winning goal. The city had never
known such glorious excitement. Meredith was the inspiration.
One Ode to the Will 0 the Wisp sent to a local newspaper
ended with these lines:

Hes a darling, hes a duck, is Meredith
And a mascot, too, for luck, is Meredith
Though ten casualties we own
Still we dont break down and moan
He can play teams quite alone, can Meredith.

Poignant, too, were the songs sung on the terraces of Crystal
Palace that glorious day when Manchester came to London
town...
Oh I wish I was you Billy Meredith
I wish I was you, I envy you, indeed I do
It aint that youre tricky with your feet
But its those centres you send in
Which Turnbull then heads in
Oh I wish I was you
Indeed I do
Indeed I do.

Thus the men of Edwardian Manchester, machine-minders,
factory apprentices, clerks, the flotsam and jetsam of the citys
industrial sprawl acclaimed their hero on a day which would
stand wondrously apart from all others in their lives. When the
team brought the FA Cup back to Manchester the whole city
turned out to pay tribute to their professional footballers.
Manchester had never known anything like it. The scene was
captured by Athletic News, the local sporting newspaper:

The band struck up See the Conquering Hero Come. As
soon as the people caught sight of the trophy, trimmed with
30
blue and white ribbons, which Meredith now and then
raised above his head, they gave vent to prodigious
cheering. Most of the windows of the upper stories were
packed with people whose plaudits, added to by the
blowing of a bugle here and there, and the music of the
band, made a deafening sound. To the accompaniment of
incessant cheering, the procession made its way at
walking-pace down Dale Street where what might be called
the welcome of the middle-classes was exchanged for that
of the proletariat. It came from rough working men and
larrikins and beshawled women and children in arms and
hand, and was as hearty if not heartier than had gone
before.

Most of professional footballs heroes have been content with
their fifteen minutes of fame and glory. They have conformed,
if not to the muddied oaf of boardroom stereotype, then to
something as insidiously demeaning; the modest, shy, self-
deprecating beneficiary of good fortune who had much for
which to thank The Game and by implication those who ruled
it. The great players  Stan Matthews and Tom Finney being
two perfect examples  may have despised the shopkeepers and
builders who ruled the professional game and may have bitterly
resented the injustices and iniquities of which they were daily
the victims, but in public they remained respectful cap-tippers,
knowing their place, accepting ritual humiliation with a grateful
smile. Privately such heroes would damn their directors and the
Football Association as all professionals did. Publicly they
tended to distance themselves from trouble.
Billy Meredith saw the absurdity of the professional players
lot from the beginning from a perspective that was unique and
- fascinating. His family were Welsh Methodists whose deepest
convictions questioned the morality of playing sport for money.
Meredith had been reluctant to turn pro, arguing that a man
could play football at weekends and have a proper job during
the week. Was it necessary to devote all your time to football,
he wondered. The answer from the professional game, admini-
stered by the Football Association, was an emphatic yes. The
very same contract that restricted players earnings to 4 a
week, and bound them to their clubs for life  unless the club
31
decided to get rid of them  insisted that professional foot-
ballers engage in no other occupation. Meredith accepted this
definition of a players obligations. He became a master
craftsman, pursuing excellence and achieving it. Then, having
attained the ultimate as a professional, Meredith demanded
- that he be- respected and rewarded accordingly. He was
branded a troublemaker.
Football was governed by a group of men, some of whom
were little better than wealthy buffoons, some of whom saw
themselves as the upholders of Corinthian values. The latter
were concerned  many of them genuinely  that profes-
sionalism would corrupt sport. This fear was philosophically
valid. It could not, however, be reconciled with the demand
made of Meredith and his contemporaries that they devote
their lives exclusively to football. Unable to reconcile a
problem they themselves had created, the Football Association
blustered arrogantly before producing the deadly fudge of
1900 which enslaved the professional player, institutionalised
deceit, and encouraged a cynical disregard for authority which
would, through the decades, right up to the present day, tarnish
every decent man who entered the world of professional soccer.
Once football became a professional sport the Corinthian
principle was set aside. Meredith, an honourable and
courageous man, who was not initially unsympathetic to the
Corinthian ideal, clearly understood better than most the
consequences of enacting football legislation which had no
basis in real law. He saw that the restrictive practices which
were to govern the lives of professional players flew in the face
of reason, and made no philosophical or moral sense, so he used
his access to newspapers to challenge the Football Association.
In books and articles he advocated reform, never missing a
chance, however oblique, to expose absurdity. He made few
friends. Asked in 1906 to contribute an article on The Art of
Wingplay, for a publication entitled Association Football and
the Men Who Made It, Meredith wrote briefly about how to
become a good winger, but the thrust of his contribution was
about the social and professional status of the player, not about
the glory but about the reality of a professional life, about the
sacrifices and injuries and the amount of dedication required of
32
the hero. Footballers deserved respect, he reminded the
readers of this semi-official publication. Reviewing Merediths
article, Jimmy Catton of Athletic News, an influential com-
mentator, observed that the great mans contribution had not
been as practical as those of other famous players writing on
their speciality. Quite.
In fact Meredith was a very practical man who had learned
from bitter experience the consequences of enacting and
attempting to enforce bad law. It couldnt be done. Ambitious
clubs would flout the FA rules. Under-the-counter payments
would become the norm. Deceit would be institutionalised. As
he repeatedly challenged the notion that professional foot-
ballers should be denied the working conditions others were
entitled to by law, Meredith sought to define professionalism
and its logical consequences which he argued were inevitable
and must be faced.

What is more reasonable than our plea that the footballer,
with his uncertain career, should have the best money he
can earn? If I can earn 7 a week, should I be debarred
from receiving it? I have devoted my life to football and I
have become a better player than most men because I have
denied myself much that men prize. A man who has taken
the care of himself that I have done, and who fights the
temptation of all that injures the system surely deserves some
recognition and reward? They congratulate me and give me
caps, but they will not give me a penny more than men are
earning in the reserve team some of whom, perhaps, do not
trouble themselves to improve and dont worry about taking
care of their condition. If football is a mans livelihood and he
does more than others for his employer why is he not entitled
to better pay than others? So far as I can make out the sole
reason why the best footballers in England are prevented
from earning better pay than men of lesser ability and
experience is purely sentimental.

The sentiments Meredith was referring to were those of the
Football Association, which responded to his arguments by
accusing him and other pros who thought like him of greed and
elitism. Merediths reply was that professionalism was, by its
very nature, elitist.
33
It would be misleading to cast Meredith in the role of starry-
eyed idealist. He was a hard man who stood to benefit more
than most from the reforms he proposed. But by 1907, when he
and a group of fellow Manchester professionals established the
first Players Union at a meeting in the citys Imperial Hotel,
experience had deepened his conviction that football must face
up to the facts of life, the most fundamental of which being that
footballers were in business, had families to support and futures
to provide for and that therefore the game must be subject to
the conditions of the marketplace like any other commercial
activity.

Although Manchester Citys glorious FA Cup triumph of 1904
had delighted the citizens of Cottonopolis, it had not pleased
the Football Association. The suspicion in official circles was
that the ambitious Mancunians had broken the rules about
wages and bonuses en route to glory. Meredith in particular was
the focus of administrative frustration. They knew what he was
like and sensed that the satisfied smile on his face as he held
their precious trophy aloft reflected not just victory over Bolton
Wanderers but defeat of the system he was known to despise.
They were right. As Meredith would years later explain with
characteristic insouciance:

What was the secret of the success of the Manchester City
team? In my opinion, the fact that the club put aside the
rule that no player should receive more than 4 a week.
From 1902 I had been paid 6 a week and Livingstone was
paid ten shillings more than that in wages. I dont believe
that any member of our team was paid less than I was, and
the season we carried off the Cup I also received 53 in
bonuses for games won and drawn. Some players drew
more. McMahon, for example, received 61 in bonuses that
season. Altogether the club paid in bonuses 654. 12s.6d.
The team delivered the goods and the club paid for the
goods delivered, and both sides were satisfied.

Within two weeks of Citys triumphant return to Manchester,
F. J. Wall, the FA secretary and J. Lewis, a member of the FA
General Council, were dispatched from London to examine the
34
clubs books. The investigation, which lasted two months,
found no evidence of illegal wages and bonuses. However, they
did uncover discrepancies in the transfer of two men to the club.
There were cheques that could not be accounted for and
obviously forged receipts presented by Citys financial director.
The men from London judged that the missing money had been
paid as a signing-on fee to persuade two players, Frank
Norgrove and Irvine Thornley, to join the club. The law, FA
law that is, permitted no signing-on fee in excess of 10. So
Manchester City were criminalised, even though the crime
was to do nothing worse than apply the enterprising spirit of
Edwardian England to professional football.
In October 1904 Manchester City were fined 250 and their
ground was closed for a month. Three directors, Josh Parlby,
John Chapman and Lawrence Furniss, were banned from
football for three years. Mr Madders, director in charge of
finance, was banned from the game for life. This was an
unsatisfactory outcome for the Football Association. Meredith
had eluded them, and the Wizard was the man they really
wanted to get. The Northern clubs in general were known to be
the most flagrant abusers of football law. In the matter of
financial constraints it was, however, Manchester City and Billy
Meredith who posed the deadliest threat to the new order. The
club was enterprising and ambitious, Meredith, the heroic
symbol of the merits of professionalism, a popular hero, willing
to challenge those whose authority was based on foundations,
which in the early years of this century, were beginning to seem
rather shaky. The whiff of revolution was in the air, workers
everywhere were questioning their masters who were fearful
and uncertain, and nowhere more so than in Association
Football, for nobody knew better than the games adminstra-
tors that professional football was a thoroughly amoral
business.
The most damning example of official cant lay at the core of
the Manchester City scandal. The Football Association knew
what was going on because when many of those charged with
upholding the laws of the game swopped their FA hats for their
club favours they were sanctioning illegal payments them-
selves. The seeds of the Swindon Town Affair of 1989, that club
35
being brought to its knees for committing a crime everyone
else was equally guilty of, were sown almost a century ago.
Meredith and his club remained in the frame. He was a
marked man and within a few months the Football Association
were back in Manchester. Citys success continued the season
after their FA Cup win. With four games left to play in the First
Division Championship only two points separated City,
Newcastle and Everton. Newcastle held the edge. In the event
they went on to take the title. In the third last game of the
season City travelled to play Everton at Goodison Park. After a
scrappy, ill-tempered match a police escort was needed to
protect the Manchester players as they left the field. Citys final
game was at Villa Park against a team fresh from winning the
FA Cup. They had to win and hoped Newcastle would lose at
Middlesborough. The two clubs were old and bitter rivals and
Villa were in no mood to do any favours for their foes from
Manchester. Another vicious struggle ensued. The ugliest
confrontation of the afternoon took place between Citys fiery
centre-forward Sandy Turnbull and the Villa captain and
England international Alec Leake. Blows were exchanged, and
as Turnbull made his way to the dressing-room after the final
whistle a group of Villa players dragged him into the home
dressing-room where the Scot was kicked and beaten. Villa had
won 3-2. Once again police were sent for. On the way from the
ground the City coach was stoned by an angry mob.
This blackguardly end to the season offered the Football
Association a pretext for yet another official inquiry.
Rowdyism was not a new feature of the professional game, but
the Associations concern, they claimed, was that profes-
sionalism was getting out of hand. Stern action was needed to
prevent the game descending into anarchy.
A desire to restore footballs reputation, the public rationale
for this latest investigation, was admirable. It was not, how-
ever, the whole truth. Of more compelling interest to the FA
than on-field behaviour were events off the field which con-
tinued to take a radical turn. The hidden agenda had more to do
with discrediting Manchester City, Aston Villa and Everton
who were, together with League champions Newcastle, leading
a campaign to have the maximum wage abolished at the
36
forthcoming AGM of the Football Association. As they were
being placed in the dock these clubs were preparing resolutions
and issuing circulars challenging the FAs right to impose
financial ceilings on earnings. Meredith was as usual agitating in
his newspaper columns. The inquiry, which delivered its verdict
on 5 August 1905, was headed by J. C. Clegg, chairman of the
FA Council, a stern defender of Edwardian values who was,
when not crusading against anarchic professionalism, the
Official Receiver of Bankruptcy for the city of Sheffield.
By mid-afternoon on 5 August, the football world, its
Manchester constituency in particular, was in a state of shock.
Newspaper headlines were for once an inadequate reflection of
the stunning story told on the page beneath them. SENSATION IN
THE FOOTBALL WORLD, BOMBSHELL IN THE CITY CAMP, THE
FOOTBALL WORLD SHOCKED. Thus, the news of Billy Merediths
suspension for attempted bribery of another player was con-
veyed to a disbelieving public.
The Clegg Inquirys findings were baffling. The fracas at Villa
Park had nothing to do with Meredith, nor indeed the incidents
at Goodison. How could an inquiry set up to investigate
violence on the pitch suddenly pass down a sentence relating to
bribery? The answer, evident if one studies the Clegg Report in
full, was that the investigation was more concerned with
tarnishing professionalism  and those who espoused it  than
dealing with unseemly behaviour on the field of play.
Manchester City and Billy Meredith were the real targets; both
had been hit.
The violence, which was the ostensible reason for setting up
the Clegg Inquiry in the first place, was dealt with summarily.
The sentencing here was in itself revealing. Tom Booth,
Evertons captain whose assault on Citys Tabby Booth had
sparked the violence at Goodison Park, was given a suspended
sentence. Alec Leake of Aston Villa, whose fight with Sandy
Turnbull had been the catalyst for the Villa Park eruption, was
found not guilty. Turnbull was suspended for a month for his
part in the incidents on and off the field. The assaults on
Turnbull in the Aston Villa dressing-room, to which Leake and
other Villa players were party, drew no official rebuke. The
burden of guilt  for all professional footballs ills - would, it
Ei
seemed, be borne by Manchester. This time the Football
Association had got its man. Having exonerated all bar Sandy
Turnbull and R. T. Johns who refereed the Everton game and
was suspended for having failed to control it properly, the Clegg
Report concluded: The Commissioners also reported on
statements brought to their notice with regard to W. Meredith
of Manchester having offered a sum of money to a player of
Aston Villa to let Manchester City win the match. W. Meredith
is suspended from football from August 4th until April 1906.
A torrent of rumour and speculation engulfed professional
football in the wake of the Meredith Scandal, but the sequel to
this murky affair would prove to be even more sensational than
the events now unfolding. Meredith immediately issued an
emphatic and widely believed denial of guilt:

I am entirely innocent and am suffering for others. Such an
allegation as that of bribery is preposterous. I could never
risk my reputation and future by such an action and I
repeat that I never made such an offer. It is totally
unjustified and grossly unfair. This sort of thing will totally
demoralise Association Football. Manchester has not many
friends among the Association officials and I doubt if the
decision will be reversed or the suspension lessened if the
whole case is reopened and enquired into.

This protestation of innocence sounds convincing enough.
But as time would show, the words I am suffering for others
offered a significant portent of the truth of this affair which was
never to be definitively established. The temptation to cast
Meredith in the role of innocent victim, reflecting the popular
mood of the time, can, with hindsight, easily be resisted: victim
he undoubtedly was, innocent he almost certainly was not.
As the facts of the case began to emerge it became clear that
there were no heroes, few who were innocent; almost all of
those involved in the conduct of professional football were
victims, caught in a web of cynicism and deception. None were
as culpable as those who governed the game. J. C. Clegg, the
expert on financial bankruptcy, seemed to care little for its
moral equivalent.
The Clegg Inquiry had, it transpired, been acting ona tip-off
38
_ regarding Meredith. The Birmingham Sports Argus revealed
that the FA Commission had been impressed by what was told
them by a disinterested witness who had overheard a most
interesting conversation between Meredith and Alec Leake the
Villa captain. Meredith had, it was alleged, offered Leake 10
to throw the game. This attempted bribery was, the Sports
Argus informed its readers, witnessed by a gentleman who
holds a responsible position in Birmingham municipal life, and
nobody would allege that he concocted the story, so the
hysterics from Manchester about being condemned merely on
the evidence of a rival player may be treated with contempt.
Meredith admitted having the conversation with Leake, but
he claimed that the offer was a joke. Leake, who was, it must
be remembered, facing charges himself, had indeed regarded
the bribery offer as a joke and had not mentioned it at his
original hearing. But he was called back to face Clegg and
company and, he claimed, forced to admit that the allegation
levelled by the gentleman who held a prominent position in
Birmingham municipal life was in fact true. Given the choice
between the word of a gentleman and that of a player there was
never any doubt about the outcome of the Clegg Inquiry. The
issue was so clear-cut that the Commission never bothered to
call Meredith to answer the charge against him. Justice as
dispensed by the Football Association  in secret  resulted in
professional footballs most renowned player having his liveli-
hood taken away from him on the hearsay evidence of a
gentleman.
Apart from the occasional caustic reference to official
humbug, W. Meredith seemed surprisingly sanguine about his
lot. Few people believed that he had tried to bribe the Villa
captain. His local newspaper, the Athletic News, spoke for most
in the game and outside: Anyone who has known the careful
life and thrift which has characterised Meredith will feel
confident that he never offered such a sum out of his own
_pocket. Where is the man who dare ask Meredith to try to
purchase a victory and give him 10 for the nefarious bargain?
There was an air of mystery about the whole affair, a sense,
heightened by official secrecy, that the whole truth had not
been revealed.
39
Meredith was further reassured by a letter he had received
from Tom Maley, Citys secretary, which promised that he
would not lose out financially during his period of suspension.
Alas, as autumn gave way to the bitter winter of 1905, during
which many Mancunians died of cold and malnutrition,
Meredith grew increasingly disenchanted. During his frequent
appearances at the City ground, his heated arguments with
directors and the secretary became the talk of the club. Having
been the victim of the FAs kangaroo justice, Billy now found
his employers reneging on their promise to see him right. No
money was forthcoming. The club denied they had made any
promise and asked the Football Association to mete out more
punishment to the scapegoat who wouldnt lie down. City
accused him of trying to illegally extract payments from them
and informed the Association that the refusal of the board to
lend itself to any illicit or illegal practices led to many threats by
the player. The rigid observation of the rules has ultimately
silenced the player, but nevertheless it has been for the board a
very trying time. Things were soon to become even more
trying.
The deal Meredith had struck with City, backed up by the
letter in his possession which informed him that he would not
be the loser by his suspension, was that in return for wages paid
during his absence from the game he would keep quiet about
certain matters. The phrase in his original denial of bribery
referring to suffering for others now haunted his City masters.
The words could mean either of two things  or indeed both:
was he inferring that he had been framed because he was the
most vocal advocate of illegal practices in vogue at City and
elsewhere, or was he suggesting that he had in fact offered
Leake a bribe but in doing so had merely acted as an
intermediary for the Manchester City club? It was time for
another FA Commission which was convened in March 1905.
Meredith, pursuing a scorched earth policy in response to his
' clubs betrayal of him, had decided to tell the unvarnished
truth.
Meredith began by confessing that he had indeed broached
the subject of selling the vital championship game with Alec
Leake, but he claimed he had been acting as a spokesman for
40
City. Club secretary Maley had provided the 10 bribe and his
team-mates had been aware of the proposed transaction.
Manchester City had constantly breached the rules regarding
wages and bonuses in their dealings with him and all the other
players. The story he told the Inquiry was of utter venality, their
rules counted for nothing at Hyde Road.
- Within a month all the damning evidence was gathered. One
by one Merediths colleagues were summoned to Manchesters
Grand Hotel where they were presented with incontrovertible
evidence of their guilt. Most confessed, throwing themselves at
the mercy of the Association. Club directors began typically by
stoutly denying their guilt and promising to prove their good
faith. Soon they too began to sing.
On 4 June the FA report was published. Manchester City had
virtually ceased to exist. All the directors were suspended. Tom
Maley and his chairman, Forest, were banned for life. The club
was fined 250. None of the players involved was to be allowed
to play for City again, several of them were fined a total of 900
and suspended for one year.
So, justice was served ... or was it? The Athletic News
thought so, castigating Meredith in uncomprising terms:

The famous footballer determined not only to make an
offer to Alec Leake  an offence which ought to have
ended his football career  not only that, he had been most
generously and lavishly paid by the club which ran dreadful
risks to give him all they had except the goalposts, but
dragged everyone else he could into the same mess. No
sense of gratitude for all the managers who, over the years,
remunerated him so that he became comparatively rich, no
ideals of friendship for the men who, admitting his enviable
playing skills, had done everything they could for him, and
no feeling of loyalty for the comrades who had fought side
by side with him in many ascrap in hard games restrained
this man from divulging the secrets of his masters and
colleagues. It would have been honourable to confess his
own deeds, to express his sorrow and promise an
amendment that he promised to fulfil, but he took a course
that amounted to revenge after he had been simply killed
by kindness by the club whose colours he wore.

41
This was self-righteous stuff based on some dubious
premises, the most dubious being that otherwise good men had
risked all to satisfy Merediths avarice. In fact, perhaps the
most remarkable aspect of the Manchester City saga was that
other players  Livingstone for example  had earned more than
Meredith, the designated scapegoat. As for the view expressed
by Athletic News that Meredith had betrayed his masters by
divulging their secrets, it was equally devoid of sense. This
canard was, however, reflective of the official rationalisation of
Manchesters wrongdoing. The buck should stop with the
professionals. Or, as one member of the Football Association
put it in his newspaper column: We cannot help feeling sorry
that men of intelligence and of good reputation in the several
walks of life (Citys directors) should have driven a coach and
four through the rules of the Association and been so generous
to the players. The professionals have not been able to resist the
impulse, the desire to obtain all they could from the club
coffers.
Meredith summed up the whole affair accurately and more
succinctly: Clubs are not punished for breaking the law. They
are punished for being found out. Assessing his role in the
scandal, one can see that he had been contaminated, not by
greed, but by professional footballs prevailing ethos, which
was, simply put, to cheat and lie whilst proclaiming the loftiest
of virtues. Understanding this, his colleagues retained their
affection and respect for the man who allegedly betrayed them.
Even though most were unwilling, as Billy Meredith was, to
voice their contempt for their masters the vast majority of
players knew he was right about the gentlemen from the
Football Association. New depths of administrative hypocrisy
were reached in the wake of the Manchester scandal, as
Meredith gleefully revealed: The League met and the repre-
sentatives of each club voted in favour of the punishment meted
out to us being enforced. And while their representatives were
passing this pious resolution most of them had other repre-
sentatives busy trying to persuade the villains whose punish-
ment had been so well deserved to sign for them under
conditions very much better in most cases than the ones we had
been ruled by at City.
42
Merediths condemnation by the Athletic News was coun-
tered elsewhere. He remained an esteemed popular hero. The
Bolton Football Field argued that he and his City colleagues
ought not to be damned. The Fields observer wrote: Let me
remind you that Meredith is no cunning astute financier or a
sleek diplomat. A village youth, an artist of football and delight
to hundreds of thousands of football enthusiasts, a maker of
thousands of pounds for League and other clubs and Associa-
tions, a sober and consistent performer. Is it right that the club
he has made famous should seem to want to be rid of the trouble
of him?
Arguments condemning Meredith and his colleagues wont
hold water, the Fields correspondent concluded.
Billy Meredith was now thirty years of age. He had made
Manchester City, and this shabby ending to what should have
been a glorious story might have broken a lesser man.
Meredith, having refused to be sacrificed, seemed to gain
strength. The Football Association had decreed that the guilty
players would be disposed of by the City club at an auction to be
held in the Queens Hotel, Manchester in November. He had
always despised the transfer system which he insisted treated
the player as though he were a sensible machine or a trained
animal. He had cost City no fee and now refused to be
auctioned to the highest bidder. After ten years service, City
owed him a benefit match and had signed a contract to that
effect. This he now produced, agreeing to waive his rights in
return for a free transfer to a club of his choosing. Thinking he
was more or less finished anyway, City and the FA complied
with his demands.
Ernest Mangnall, the shrewd manager of Manchester
United, then the citys poor relations and newly promoted
from the Second Division, moved swiftly to sign the Welsh
Wizard. At the auction Mangnall also acquired Merediths
former City colleagues, Herbert Burgess, Sandy Turnbull and
_ Jimmy Bannister. The foundations were thus laid for
Manchesters second great team which, like City in 1904, would
be inspired by Meredith and the source of extraordinary
civic pride. The scene was also set for the final, decisive
confrontation between Players and Gentlemen, the outcome of
43
which would determine the character of professional football in
England right up to the present day.
The trauma of the previous two years had radicalised
Meredith and many others who saw beyond glory and the next
pay-packet. Workers everywhere were uniting to seek free-
dom. There had been a revolution in Russia; at home the
Labour Party was about to be formed; strikes were causing
disruption the length and breadth of Britain; mens notions of
fairness and justice were changing; miners rioted in Stafford-
shire; and Manchester was brought to a standstill by demon-
strations of the unemployed and striking transport and munici-
pal workers. Soon a reforming Liberal Government would be
elected'to office.
The time was ripe for Meredith to turn defiant rhetoric into
decisive action. He found kindred spirits in the Manchester
United dressing-room. Two men in particular shared his views,
the club captain, Charlie Roberts and Herbert Bloomfield,
Uniteds reserve goalkeeper. Roberts, principled and intelli-
gent, had himself tried to form a Players Union in 1903. Now
he conspired with Meredith to establish a representative body
which would right the fundamental wrongs of the professional
game once and for all.
The inaugural meeting of the Players Union took place on 2
December 1907 at the Imperial Hotel in Manchester. Players
from a dozen clubs attended. The following month at the Kings
Arms in Sheffield officers were elected and a manifesto issued
which set out their three principal demands: an end to wage
restraint; freedom of contract; and access to the laws of the land -
rather than the corrupting rules of professional football.
Reaction was at first mixed. Later that year in a move that has
ironic resonance today twenty-two top League clubs threatened
to form their own Super-League if some measure of common
sense was not applied to the professional game. Even the
Football Association seemed to concede that some liberalisa-
tion of their laws was in order. But the voices of reactionaries
were also heard, some predictable, some surprising. Respond-
ing to the players assertions that complete freedom from all
restraints was the only solution, Athletic News contended: We
have no hesitation in saying that the sweeping aside of all
44
restrictions with reference to money is solely the idea of a few
rich clubs and a few players who are ina class by themselves.
This was an indirect swipe at Manchester, United in particular,
which, under the influence of Mangnall and his enlightened
chairman, J. J. Davies, understood the players aspirations and
shared the view that football business should be conducted
honestly and above board. Davies, a Manchester businessman,
agreed to become the Unions first president, with Jimmy
Catton of Athletic News as one of the new vice- presidents. This
latter appointment gives some indication of the moral
confusion in the professional game of 1908. For while their
distinguished correspondent was lending support to the players
cause, Athletic News was commenting disapprovingly: We now
know the ultimate demands of the players. They may be
crystalised into one sentence: Unlimited wages, with the right
to move from clubs and share in the transfer fees. These are the
dreams of visionaries. It was not, it seemed, in footballs
interests for players to be either dreamers or visionaries.
Mr C. E. Sutcliffe, an FA Council member, was even more
outraged  and outrageous  than the conservative sporting
newspaper: The strong feature of the players demands was
self-interest. This spirit of selfishness had threatened to ruin
the game before the maximum wage had been introduced,
Sutcliffe claimed. He had wanted to help them, he went on, but
I can play no part in helping the players to immoderate and
unreasonable demands. Meredith and and his cohorts were,
Sutcliffe cautioned them, committing suicide, their resolu-
tions were contemptible claptrap and what was more, they
were ignoring his, and his Leagues, wise counsel. We were
running football years before some prominent players knew
anything about it. In conclusion, Sutcliffe, the archetypal
Edwardian Gent, defined the struggle now raging as being
between masters and servants. The servants demands for
freedom were but the outward and visible sign of inward
greed.
The arguments continued and intensified over the next
eighteen months before being resolved in the summer of 1909.
The story of that ending is a pitiful parable of professional
soccer in England; a handful of decent courageous men 
45
visionaries  drowning in a sea of apathy, intolerance and
venality.
Manchester United won the FA Cup in 1909. Alas, the
celebrations were blighted by the Players Union controversy.
Roberts and Meredith had urged their members to join with
their fellow workers in the General Federation of Trades
Unions and, if necessary, resort to strike action which the
GFTU would support to win their rights under the law. The
Players Unions desire to seek refuge and justice in the law of
the land was perceived by the Football Association as a deadly
threat, all the more potent because those posing it were among
the best footballers in the country. Rather than sue for peace
through compromise, the FA warned those clubs sympathetic
to the Unions cause that their power over their servants was at
stake. And to clubs wavering between right and wrong,
between the shabby deceit of underhand dealings and the
honest and enterprising future which visionaries promised,
the administration offered a deal that was, for such self-
regarding men as C. E. Sutcliffe, astonishingly and audaciously
venal. If all Football League clubs would insert a clause into
their players contracts for the following season 1909/10, which
effectively disowned the Players Union and pledged loyalty to
the FA and its rules, the Association would declare an amnesty
for all clubs which had hitherto breached the law in regard to
wages and bonuses, excusing all previous misdemeanours. The
clubs, many of them up to their necks in misdemeanours and
fearing that their players might turn Kings evidence as
Meredith had done, agreed.
An ultimatum was presented to the players: forfeit your
rights under the law of England or face banishment from the
game. With a rather sad mixture of sarcasm and naivity,
Athletic News reflected: Until a week ago, the clubs, the
employers were under the thumb of the players and the Union.
But the FA offered a free pardon to the clubs if they refused to
be dictated to by the players, if they would refuse to pay players
sums of money in violation of the rules. The clubs consented to
be honest and started with a clean slate. The players lost their
power and ceased to be the real masters and now they have to
rest content with a miserable pittance of 4 a week all the year
46
through, many free meals and perquisites during training, and
three months holiday every summer if they are not taken for a
continental tour  miscalled a football tour. The plight of the
football player is terrible.
Jimmy Catton, the players erstwhile friend, had returned
from his off-side position. The signing-on process, with its
disavowing clause, would be, Catton now claimed, an act of
loyalty just as much as the enlistment of a soldier.
The final act of this tragedy was now played out. During the
close-season players dispersed to their home towns. Some were
scared, some apathetic, many simply happy to be professional
footballers belonging, they imagined, to a higher caste than the
average working man. Meredith continued to proselytise, along
with Roberts and Bloomfield, offering defiant leadership in the
certainty that right was on the Unions side. Their Manchester
United colleagues supported this stance and refused, en bloc, to
sign the Rogues Charter that would institutionalise perversity,
deceit and injustice in the English professional game for all
time. The coming of the new season saw the Manchester men
isolated from their peers. The United players, the FA Cup
heroes of three months before, were suspended sine die. Once
more sensational headlines told the story:
THE WHOLE OF THE ENGLISH CUP-WINNERS SUSPENDED SINE
DIE,
MANCHESTER UNITED WITHOUT A TEAM.
For the second time in his career Billy Meredith  the cup-
winning hero  experienced the strange kind of glory that was
professional football; one day a hero, the next the victim of
abject humiliation.
The United players were now footballs self-proclaimed
Outcasts, yet, as Charlie Roberts recalled in his memoirs:

None of us had received any official intimation from the
FA that we were suspended, so we turned up for our wages
as usual the Friday after our suspension was announced.
We waited and waited for our manager but he did not
appear that morning and all we could get out of the office-
boy was, There are no wages for you as the FA suspended
you all.
Well something will have to be done, said Sandy
47
Turnbull as he took a picture off the wall and walked out
of the office with it under his arm. The rest of the boys
followed suit, and looking-glasses, hairbrushes and several
other things were for sale a few minutes after atalittle
hostelry at the corner of the ground.
I stayed behind a while with the office-boy, who was in a
terrible state over the players taking things away and he
was most anxious to get them back before the manager
arrived. Come along with me and I will get them back for
you, I said, its only one of their little jokes. I soon
recovered the lost property for him. But it was funny to see
the players walking off the ground with the pictures etc.
under their arms.
Two contrasting images from the summer of 1909 offer a
poignant insight into the lives of professionals of that age: one,
the glorious homecoming after winning the FA Cup; then, a
couple of months later, the heroes pilfering from the
Manchester United offices to try to scrape a few shillings
together.
In the first week of November a ballot of players was held to
decide the issue of affiliating to the GFTU. The alternative was
to accept an FA compromise which allowed the Players Union
a token existence. The result was 470 against affiliation, 172 for.
Meredith, Bloomfield and Roberts had lost their most
important game. The struggle was over. The master/servant
relationship would remain in existence for over fifty years,
serving only to contaminate both.
W. Meredith was the last player to re-sign the Rogues
Charter. Reflecting on the struggle, Meredith ruefully acknow-
ledged: I confess that the bulk of the players have not shown
much pluck in the matter . . . but those who voted in favour of
remaining within the GFTU have the satisfaction of knowing
that they behaved like men. A man said to me the other day,
Ah, the players have not the pluck of the miners, and he was
right, of course.
Billy Meredith embodied and, perhaps more than any other,
reflected professional soccers wicked contradictions. His abid-
ing conviction was that players ought not to be full-timers.
Football should be a recreation, not a career. Yet, if profes-
sionalism was forced upon them footballers should be free as
48
other men to earn as much as they could and organise
themselves as they saw fit. The professionals had too much time
on their hands and too many of them squandered their money
and their talent on gambling and drink. Living thus as
pampered idols many professionals were reduced to a pitiful
state of dependence, no matter how gifted they were. These
convictions about behaviour, and the proper relationship
between money and sport, suggest that Merediths Methodist
upbringing had left its mark upon him. What he sought, for
himself and his peers, was dignity. To some extent, as we have
seen, he failed in this regard. He was the victim of circum-
stances, the most profound of which was his love for a game run
by masters and played by slaves. Of football, the games first
and most inspiring rebel would later write: My heart was
always full of it.
3
A Prince Among Pros
I feel I am out of my sphere in
football.
Matt Busby

Meredith had returned to City in 1921 as player/coach at the
behest of Ernest Mangnall who had signed him for United in
1906. Meredith was one of the first people Matt Busby
encountered when he arrived in Manchester in February 1928.
Now fifty-three, Meredith was coaching the younger players at
Maine Road. The Football Association had succeeded in
breaking the Players Union in 1909 but not its founding
father. The taming of the Union had not shaken Merediths
convictions. The emancipation of professionals apart, the most
fundamental of Merediths convictions concerned fitness and
preparation for playing. Conventional wisdom about the life-
span of a professional footballer was resisted as fiercely as the
idea that he should be enslaved. If professionals wanted to be
respected they must, he believed, respect themselves. Self-
respect began with your body. Meredith was fastidious, almost
obsessive, about his own physical condition. In this, as in most
other matters, he was an enlightened man apart from this peers.
He was almost teetotal and never smoked. On match days he
would take a glass of port before the game and eat boiled
chicken afterwards. His grandmother had passed on her
extensive knowledge of herbal remedies, and comfrey was a
particular favourite of his for healing strains and other muscular
ailments. Meredith had regular massage, using various embro-
cations including a foul-smelling ointment he called dog-fat,
sometimes used on mining machinery, which he would smear
on his torso and legs. He paid the most meticulous attention to
injuries, however minor. When in doubt he consulted two of his
50
sisters who were nurses or his wife, Ellen, who had trained for
nursing. His dressing-room colleagues were amused by his fads.
They trusted to fate and the club doctor. Billy knew better. In
1902 Di Jones, Citys captain, had fallen and cut his knee during
a pre-season friendly match. He had been treated by the club
doctor and had gone home to convalesce. The wound turned
septic because it had not been properly treated. A week later
Jones died.
Meredith understood that the better you looked after
yourself, the longer youd play. And, of course, the better
you'd be while you were playing. This battle he didnt lose, and
he continued playing until 1924 when he made his last
appearance for Manchester City in the FA Cup semi-final. He
was four months short of his fiftieth birthday.
Mangnall was, like Meredith, a singular man. A Bolton-born
grammar-school boy, Mangnall had joined United in 1903 from
Burnley where he had been club secretary. Mangnall was tough
and well educated, with a penchant for straw boaters and
Havana cigars. He was to become the prototype pre-Second
World War football manager, concerned more with the wheel-
ing and dealing of club administration than the finer points of
the game on the field. Mangnall had rescued Burnley from dire
financial circumstances and his immediate task at United was to
do the same. This he did and much more. Having languished in
the Second Division for nine years before Mangnall joined
them, United narrowly missed promotion twice before he led
them back to the First Division in 1906. When later that year he
swooped to sign Billy Meredith, Mangnall demonstrated his
understanding of, and contempt for, the cant that was endemic
to the professional game. Manchester Citys demand for a 600
transfer fee was resisted by Meredith, and City were forced to
give him a free transfer in the end. In his memoirs Meredith
revealed that a gentleman had given him 500 to sign for
United. Ernest Mangnall arranged that meeting between
willing Gentleman and dissenting Player.

Mangnall and Meredith were congenial partners. They hadnt
invented the rules that were supposed to govern all football
transactions and neither man felt morally bound bytheir
51
constraints. When it came to steering a course between the
smug self-serving illusions of those who ran football and the
realities of the pro game, Mangnall and Meredith allowed
pragmatism to be their guiding star.
Mangnalls bold acquisition of Meredith and his disgraced
City colleagues, Turnbull, Bannister and Burgess, was soon
rewarded. In 1907/8 United won their first championship. The
following season the FA Cup came back to Manchester.
Mangnall had transformed a struggling Second Division club by
encouraging clever free-flowing football and added a new
chapter to Manchesters burgeoning football tradition.
Uniteds pitch at Bank Street, Clayton, tended to turn into a
quagmire in the winter months which was not conducive to the
teams style. In 1909 Mangnall proposed a spectacular solution
to this problem: capitalising on the teams achievements, he
persuaded the clubs directors to commission architect Archi-
bald Leitch to design a new stadium with the best facilities in the
land.
On Saturday 19 February 1910, Manchester United moved
into their new 100,000 capacity home at Old Trafford. The
press preview the previous day had taken journalists breath
away. This was a classic ground, one scribe wrote. The pitch
was like a lush green carpet and, the writer went on, the
appurtenances of the ground are excellent in conception,
construction and arrangement. The first game against
Liverpool attracted 50,000 paying Mancunians and another
5,000 were estimated to have sneaked in free of charge. The
Manchester Guardian reported astonishing scenes in the city in
the hours before the game. Such acrowd has never before been
seen in Manchester. Hordes of people swarmed up the Chester
Road. Trams were barely able to move under the weight of
passengers. Some travelled by cart, a few on horseback. All
were awestruck by the stadium, which, it was generally agreed,
was the finest in the world.
Old Trafford was a fitting monument to a team that had won
the League and FA Cup in previous seasons, a symbol, also, of
the pride Manchesters professionals had bestowed on the city
and its citizens. The combination of success and defiance of
the London-based football Establishment was enchanting.
52
Wizards on the field, rebels off it, Uniteds professionals
embodied the citys romantic sense of itself as a place apart
from any other.
In 1911 Meredith and his men won the championship again.
The following year Ernest Mangnall left the club to cross
Manchester and join City. Uniteds directors werent unhappy to
see him go. The construction of Old Trafford had emptied
Uniteds bank account. Mangnall had grown too big for his boots.
City, still struggling to recover from the scandal of 1906, offered
Mangnall the job of secretary/manager. Eighteen months later
they were top of the First Division, while United were heading
rapidly in the other direction. Then the Great War intervened.
Meredith guested for Mangnalls City during the war. When
hostilities ceased he sought a transfer from United, but,
belligerent as ever, he refused to move if any fee changed hands.
He held out for three years before United released him to rejoin
City and Mangnall. He was forty-six years of age.
Mangnall had kept City solvent and the team had finished
runners-up in the First Division in 1921. But, for both him and
Meredith the great days had passed, and in 1924 City refused to
renew their secretary/managers contract. Manchesters first
great football era had drawn to an end. Before being dismissed
by City, Ernest Mangnall rendered Manchester football one
final service when he commissioned the building of Maine Road
which would, like Old Trafford, become one of the finest
stadiums in the country.

Billy Meredith had no real vocation for coaching. He was too
obsessed with himself to dwell on others needs and imperfec-
tions. Coaching was a way of prolonging his football life, the
only life he really understood or cared about. He had always
had interests outside of football, but they were merely ways of
making money, and sometimes losing it. Matt Busby and he
passed like ships in the night. One the grand old man, the other
_ ayoung prince. The young prince was confident, his life before
him. The old mans best days were past. Like many great old
players, Meredith was slightly sad, miscast in the marginal role
now afforded to him.
The game was changing and he disapproved of the changes.
53
The off-side law had been altered in 1925. Herbert Chapman
had emerged as a great manager at Huddersfield Town where
his imaginative response to change, the introduction of a
centre-half or stopper around whom defensive play would
pivot, had enabled his team to dominate the First Division
which they won in three successive seasons between 1924 and
27. Meredith believed  and loudly proclaimed  that soccers
emphasis had shifted disastrously from skill to pace and
strength. People listened but less attentively. Chapman
was the hero of the new age. Billy eventually left football in
1930 to run a pub in Stretford. By then the young prince from
Bellshill had discovered the pro game. It was nothing like his
dream.
Professional football was a brutal business, Matt soon
learned. In Bellshill hed been renowned, a figure of note, the
young man who was going places. Manchester City and other
clubs, among them Glasgow Celtic, had wooed him. It would be
hard of course, there were no guarantees, hed been warned,
but he would be all right. They wouldnt be taking him if they
thought otherwise. The urgency of the club representatives
pleas vouched for their confidence in him. The fuss was
gratifying.
Matt signed for City in the Bank Restaurant in Glasgow
owned by Willie Maley, a famous former Celtic manager. It was
an auspicious occasion. Arriving in Manchester, however, he
quickly came down to earth. Nobody seemed to notice his
coming. The fuss was over. He was anonymous, just another
youngster who could play, and football was full of kids who
could play  in their local town or village  but playing here for
money was a different matter. The atmosphere at Maine Road
was coarse and unforgiving. In those days clubs carried huge
staffs of between forty and fifty pros, sometimes more. Only
the eleven in the first team were contented, and not even all of
them. Fear, discontent and disillusion were in the air. City was a
typical professional football club, no place for dreamers, no
place for kids whod been big-time in their own village. The old
pros knew how to sort them out, and they relished the job. Kids
with talent and brio were an irritant. They reminded the old
pros how theyd been when they thought the world revolved
54
around them. This fucking game soon taught you otherwise.
Naivety on or off the field was harshly treated. Mistakes made
when playing earned you a bollocking and a withering look; in
the dressing-room innocence was sneered at, the source of
much contemptuous laughter. It was as if the senior players
were reassuring themselves, eliminating potential challengers
before the contest began.
To a youngster newly arrived in the pro game, the player
youd worshipped could turn out to be a foul-mouthed bastard
with a heart of stone. The nobleman of Saturday afternoon was
simply an identity he assumed; the real man was a shock. Many
young dreamers never recovered from the reality.
For the first couple of years it seemed as if young Matt Busby
would be one of professional footballs casualties. After his first
game at inside-forward in the Central League, against Preston
North End at Deepdale, Matt realised how difficult things could
be. He hardly got a kick. The pace of the game was beyond him.
There seemed to be no time on the ball, no space in which
to work. The young prince of Bellshill was irrevelant. City were
well beaten. Alex James, then an established star with Preston,
called into the dressing-room after the game to wish Matt well.
This thoughtful gesture was as appreciated as it was rare. A few
weeks later, City, chasing promotion from the Second Division,
signed a complete forward line, Horne, Marshall, Tait, Tilson
and Brook, a decision which left Matt in no doubt how far away
he was from glory.
Matts confidence evaporated as the months passed. He had
always been the commanding figure on a football field. With a
deft touch and his ability to distribute the ball accurately and
imaginatively he could compensate for the one flaw in his game
~a lack of pace. Speed of thought had always served to conceal
his slowness, but now this deficiency was ruthlessly exposed.
Like all touch players he depended on confidence; the nerveless
pause where others would hurry; the daring flick where others
_ would lunge and thrust; the chipped pass that floated tanta-
lisingly, tempting an opponent to reach the ball which would
surely elude him to find a colleague; feinting and shimmying
past the aggressive foe to escape from the tightest corners,
triumphant with just a hint of arrogance. All of this achieved by
55
instinct, an unerring sense of danger, where it was coming from,
how to avoid it.
In Bellshill Matt had felt invincible. Now he discovered how
wretchedly awkward the game could be when you lost confi-
dence. He was now the lunger. Where once he escaped by a
yard he was now trapped. That yard made all the difference
between the pro game and the game played by dreamers.
Anxiety disarmed the touch player. Self-doubt caused the
passes to be overhit, the delicate flicks to be mistimed, your
every feint to be anticipated and countered. Now the disdain
was on your opponents face, and your team-mates. For fucks
sake, son. The words, spat out with venom, began to haunt
you. Your soul, once warmed by approving cheers, now chilled.
You began to dread receiving the ball. The unexpressed anger,
reflected in a look or gesture that hinted you were hardly worth
rebuke, was worse than the oaths of impatience.
Matt Busby learned these bitter lessons in his first few months
in the pro game. Once the season ended he caught the first
available train home to Orbiston. Manchester City had won
promotion. The celebrations only made his plight worse.
The three-month break restored his confidence. Playing in
summer games with old friends, he rediscovered his touch and
felt once more the comfort of being in control of the rhythm ofa
game. Back among his own folk he reflected on the differences
between his new life and the one hed eagerly left behind.
The most striking contrast between Matts new world and life
in the pits was in mens attitude to each other. The team ethos
that was supposed to exist in football really did exist among
miners. Once you were old enough to go down the mine you
were deemed worthy of respect. Experienced miners made fun
of youngsters. But it was gentle fun, designed not to wound or
demean but simply to lighten the gloom of the day. Down on
the coalface older men wanted younger men to learn; experi-
ence was a gift you passed on, knowing that your life might
depend on the man next to you. He wasnt, as in football, a
threat or a rival. He was part of your shift, taking the same risks
for the same reward, serving the same master. You depended
on each other. The camaraderie was real. There was no place
36
for vanity, selfishness or greed. Loyalty wasnt, as in football
clubs, a rhetorical call to arms, rather the essence upon which
your life depended. Team spirit was something more than an
expedient on the road to glory.
Young Matt returned to Manchester determined to deal with
football on its own terms. He was harder now, but, in the short
term at least, things didnt improve. He was surprised to be
selected for the first team when Eric Brooks and Tommy
Johnson were claimed to represent the Football League. Citys
manager, Peter Hodge, took a calculated risk choosing Matt.
The boy was impressive in his manner and bearing, he was
reserved and impeccably behaved, a cut above the average; and
he looked good in training, good enough to be a player.
Training in those days was casual and disorganised. The senior
players decided, by and large and they pleased themselves. If
you were good enough you were fit enough. The converse was
also deemed to be true. The manager was in the office most of
the week, making deals, appeasing directors, keeping himself a
respectful distance from the players  or so he imagined.
Officers and men couldnt get too close, after all. It was the
trainers job to look after the training, but compared to the
senior players his influence was marginal. Power was the ability
to do the business on a Saturday afternoon. If you were in the
first team the rest of the week was your own. If you were striving
to get on that was your own business. Nobody would stop you 
the men in possession would simply keep an amused eye on
ou.
4 To this haphazard norm the weekly practice match between
first team and reserves was the presumed exception. Presumed
that is by the reserves, and trainers and managers, naive enough 
to confuse Tuesday morning with Saturday afternoon.
Cynicism wasnt all pervasive, but those players tainted by it
could be disproportionately influential. In this hard mans
world the sceptic was king. Even the most enthusiastic first
team player found it difficult to rise to the occasion of the
practice match. The absence of a crowd made it hard to get the
adrenalin flowing. The empty stadium added to the air of
unreality; the hollow sound mocking this phoney war was the
echo of your own voice rebounding eerily from the terraces.
oF
This was artificial, football without pain and therefore devoid of
pleasure and purpose. Except for the reserves striving to
impress.
For the reserves the midweek practice match was more
important than any Central League match. The manager was
watching, he was the atmosphere. Very often the absence of
spectators was a blessing; mistakes would not be greeted with
derisive jeering. It was in such circumstances that young Matt
Busby caught Peter Hodges eye. With the senior players
relaxed, he had time and space to display his talent. On the
strength of his midweek performances Matt was given his chance
in a home game against Middlesborough which City won 20. He
did well but was back in the reserves the following week. There
was to be no instant cure for his problems, indeed life got harder.
He continued to mystify Peter Hodge and torment himself mixing
midweek brilliance with weekend mediocrity. Switching positions
from inside-left to outside-right and centre-forward was no
solution. Injury to Tilson gave Matt another first team
opportunity in an FA Cup replay against Spurs. City won 4-2,
Matt scoring two of the goals. This time he kept his place for an
away fixture against Bolton Wanderers but he had a nightmare
game at Burnden Park and was dropped the following week.
Matts despair deepened. Writing home to Jean he told her,
I feel I am out of my sphere in football. The truth, which he
glimpsed in his more objective moments, was that he was the
victim of circumstances. Matt was, like other young boys alone,
left to fend for himself in a sport that was savage from top to
bottom. Professional soccer was hierarchical; ninety per cent of
those at the bottom were crushed, had their spirits broken by
cruelty or indifference.
The trouble began at the. top. The directors were either idiots
or autocrats who contributed nothing to the club. Affectations
of grandeur were their raison detre. They preened themselves
when things were good, searched for scapegoats when the
results turned. The manager was their representative. He did
their bidding, listened to their suggestions on team matters and
then accepted responsibility for their mistakes. As the job was
defined he could only be a wretch desperate for approval  for
employment.
58
The players knew this, the older ones with talent at once
sustained and undone by the managers weakness. Their
contempt for his attempts to lift them on match days was, in the
case of the good players whose example was followed down the
line, thinly veiled. They were slaves to this master? At the end
of this inglorious trail the starry-eyed kid was either ignored or
the focus of resentment. Everybody had their own problems,
his were his alone.
Not all football clubs were like that, but most were.
Occasionally an autocrat like Chapman or Mangnall would
happen along, identify what needed to be done and enforce his
will, but leadership was rare for it incurred great risks. The
manager with strong opinions of his own  some kind of vision 
better make it work  and quick. Sometimes, too, a group of
good men ran a dressing-room, making the place less comfort-
able for bullies and vicious piss-takers, but this was rare, for as
the fate of Charlie Roberts, Herbert Bloomfield and Billy
Meredith illustrated, football was inhospitable to decency,
unrewarding of justice, deaf to reason.
In this brutish environment Matt Busby was indeed out of his
sphere. Few were sensitive to his woes, which grew so intense
during his second season at Maine Road that after yet another
bleak day he returned to his lodgings, took out his suitcase and
flung his few belongings into it with the intention of catching the
next train to Glasgow. Fortunately his room-mate, a fellow Scot
Phil McCloy, walked in on this scene. McCloy was a first team
player who cared for the kids. Hed been through this, he
recalled as he sat young Matt down to reconsider. Dont do
this, kid, McCloy advised. Give it a little longer. You can still
make the grade. Matt had never worn his heart on his sleeve, so
the desperation beneath the sturdy self-possession surprised his
room-mate. They discussed the situation into the small hours
before Matt relented and unpacked his case. .
Despite his footballing traumas Matt had retained the respect
of all at Maine Road. He was reserved, but not priggish. He
never used bad language, was a regular attender at Mass, yet he
joined in the dressing-room banter with the more raucous
characters. He dressed smartly. Barely twenty, he was mature
beyond his years with an indefinable quality that set him apart
59
from the others, a certain graciousness, almost feline, strange
to see ina large, powerful, young man. Matt was a good listener
and nobody impressed him more than Jimmy McMullen,
Manchester Citys veteran captain, whod played in the great
Scotland team that beat England at Wembley in 28. Shortly
after Phil McCloys sympathetic intervention, Matt contracted
pneumonia. He was physically and psychologically at an all-
time low when McMullen offered the hand of friendship that
undoubtedly saved Matts football life. The City captain invited
the struggling young reserve to come and live with him and his
family. Whether through a sense of responsibility or because, as.
a footballer of touch and vision like Matt, he empathised with
his desperate young compatriot, McMullen became his mentor.
McMullens generosity and advice did not produce instant
results. Coming to the end of the 1929/30 season Matt was half
expecting to be released by City. Life as a collier back in
Orbiston beckoned and he wasnt sure he would grieve too
much if this were to be his fate. To his surprise he was retained.
It must have been a marginal decision, undoubtedly swayed by
his behaviour and the ability hed revealed in the midweek
practice matches.
After a carefree summer in Orbiston he dreaded returning to
Maine Road. By the autumn of 1930 his fortunes had further
declined. He lost his place in the reserves. For a professional
player of his experience this was the ultimate indignity. He later
learned that around this time Manchester Uniteds chief-scout,
Louis Rocca, approached City to inquire about Matts avail-
ability. Nobody was more available. Peter Hodge asked for the
nominal sum of 150. Alas, United, very much Manchesters
second club in those years, couldnt afford the fee. Had Matt
been costing City any more than 5 a week he would certainly
have been givena free transfer.
He was no more than a gap-filler for Citys Central League
side. Then one afternoon when he was hanging around the
ground to watch Citys third team play in a Northern Midweek
game, a young amateur trialist failed to turn up and trainer Alex
Bell asked Matt to fill in at right-half. Until now, thinking too
much had been one of his downfalls; now with no time to
confuse himself he simply went out and played.
60
This, he would later recall, was the first time he truly enjoyed
a game of football since coming to England almost two years
earlier. Manager Hodge enjoyed the performance as well. The
following Saturday Matt played right-half for the reserves
against Sheffield Wednesday at Hillsborough. When regular
first team right-half, Matt Barrass, was injured a week later
Matt Busby was selected to play in the first team away to
Huddersfield. Barrass never regained his first team place.
Busby was a revelation as a wing-half. A forward needed
pace to be really effective at the highest level. Not the
devastating pace of a sprinter, more like a change of gears to
accelerate through those vital first few yards once you had
deceived your marker and made some space to work in. Matt
had only one gear. Enough for Tuesday morning, but not for
the quicker, adrenalin-driven rhythm of a First Division match
day. But the most fundamental difference between his new role
and the old one was that he now received the ball facing the way
his team were playing. He had more time, more space, and,
receiving the ball earlier in an attacking thrust, he could dictate
the rhythm of the move. It was the difference between being the
conductor and a mere player in the orchestra, more cerebral
than physical. Technically and temperamentally Matt Busby
was perfect for the part. The long severe apprenticeship was
over, his life transformed within a few weeks.
Over the next few years Matt Busby established himself as
one of the finest wing-halves in the game. His lack of pace and
palpable absence of real aggression meant that greatness was
denied him. But in possession of the ball he was always
delightfully perceptive. Years later his contemporary and
friend Joe-Mercer, of Everton and England, remembered:
What made Matt noticeable was the silkiness in possession, the
way he drifted inside from the wing and then switched the ball
back over the head of the full-back for his winger. He had this
calm influence on events around him. He pin-pointed his passes
uncannily like Paddy Crerand. I think Matt and Archie
Macaulay were two of the most delicate strikers of a ball there
have been.
Of modern players, Jimmy Murphy, who played for West
Brom and Wales in Matts time, thought he was most like Jim
61
Baxter: He was the master of the reverse pass having this
marvellous control with his inside foot. He was subtle and
always seemed to do things at his own pace.

Manchester City reached the FA Cup Final in successive years,
1933 and 34. In 1933 they lost to Everton 30, with the great
Dixie Dean scoring one of Evertons goals. Cliff Britton,
Evertons right-half, who would go on to be a leading club
manager with Burnley, Everton, Preston and Hull City, had a
hand in Evertons first two goals. The following season City
\returned to Wembley where a Tilson goal three minutes
from time gave them victory over Portsmouth. Citys regular
goalkeeper, Len Langford, and his deputy, Barber, were both
injured, allowing a virtually unknown nineteen-year-old, Frank
Swift, to win an FA Cup winners medal with less than a handful
of first team games to his credit. Upon hearing the final whistle
Swift fainted and had to be revived to receive his medal from
King George V. In its match report of the final, the Daily
Telegraph commented: Busby, the finest right-half ever seen at
Wembley, and Brook inspired the whole side.
Later in 1934 Matt won his first and only peacetime cap for
Scotland, against Wales in the Home International series. That
wonderful season was his finest as a player. He would never win
another medal or, except for a few wartime internationals, be
selected for Scotland again. City finished fourth in the First
Division in 1935, their highest placing in his time with them. Early
the following season he tore a hamstring and began a tormenting
phase of his career which ended when he was tranferred to
Liverpool for 8,000 in March 1936. As with most other things,
injured players were left to fend for themselves. Treatment was
rudimentary, not much improved since Billy Merediths day.
When you were of no use life went on without you. Soon even the
man described in a Guardian profile of a year before as being at
best [a player] who has no superior as an attacking half-back
began to feel dejected and isolated. In a desperate attempt to cure
himself Matt went to Southport with a friend to consult a quack
who, it was rumoured, could fix anything muscular. The method
was to drop blocks of ice on the injured spot. It didnt work for
Matt. Eventually he asked City for a transfer.
62
Matts dissatisfaction with the game was more profound than
the relatively simple matter of absence from the team through
injury. He was twenty-six and had experienced professional
football from top to bottom, from the anonymity of the reserve
team dressing-room to the games most coveted stage, the
Royal Box at Wembley, where he had received his winners
medal from the King. But the game had disappointed him too
often. Even the glory of Wembley that other men dreamed
about, as he himself had done, was not as fulfilling ast might
have been. What was missing was spiritual rather than material.
Success had not blinded Matt, it had served only to accentuate
his awareness of professional footballs ills. The joy of Cup
Final victory was brief. There followed the vanity and the
squabbles about the spoils of victory. The slave culture had
bred greed, mistrust and resentment. In an autobiography
published almost forty years after the reality of the pre-war
game crystallised in his mind Busby remarked: Long before I
became established, before I moved from Manchester City to
Liverpool I vowed that if I ever became a manager I would
respect players as individuals. There was, he recalled, a
seemingly unbridgeable gulf between first team players and the
rest, and an even wider gulf between players and management.
I was appalled by these gulfs and about the indignities that were
heaped on players. There are players, of course, who are too
thick to understand that they are being got at. There are others
who feel every stinging, sarcastic thrust, every bullying,
scoffing, snide wisecrack.
Like Billy Meredith before him, Matt Busby had understood
his trade. The greatest evil was the absence of respect for the
individual. Unlike Meredith, Busby the player kept his own
counsel. He was no crusader. He was no rebel either. I had
decided that loud noises were not my forte and that strength
was not measured in decibels, he reflected, in a slightly
different context, in his autobiography. By the time he was
ready to leave Manchester City Busby knew what ailed the
game he loved. He knew also that overt dissent earned one the
tag of troublemaker, and football dealt ruthlessly with those
who questioned its values too insistently. His manifesto, drawn
up, as he put it, to imbue professional football with the
63
essential qualities I felt had been missing from the game as I had
known it remained a secret document of his imagination. He
understood that professional football was in essence a shabby
replica of Britains class-ridden society, snobbish, vain and
deceitful, rewarding least those who invested most in it. In the
game as he envisaged it everybody [was] important to himself
-the director, the manager, the secretary, the players, the
trainers, the coaches, the groundsmen, the tea-ladies, the lot.
Their importance must not only be appreciated, it must be seen
to be appreciated. The emphasis was his.
Matt Busbys response to the disillusioning realities of the
professional game was characteristically prudent. The sensi-
tivity that prompted his concern for the individual also
governed his reaction to what he clearly saw as footballs most
pervasive disease. Matt was a cautious man. There was no
explosion, no angry agitation. He hated confrontation. He was,
as all had remarked, a reserved man, loath to bare his inner self,
to display his emotions in public. Many associates have
remarked on Busbys need for privacy. Prudent . . . a very
prudent man, intensely private, thus, the painter Harold Riley,
a close friend, described him. You could never push my dad,
his son Sandy would recall, he would reveal things in his own
time with a little prompting. If he wanted to. If not. . . There
was a part of Matt that no one except Jean reached.
He always kept you there, remembers Charlie Mitten,
outside-left in the first successful Busby team, his arm stretched
out pointing just beyond touching distance. Privacy, his own
and other peoples, mattered deeply to Matt Busby. Respect
for the individual was not just a footballing imperative, it
covered everything, most of all the emotions. Ones deepest
feelings were ones own, intrusion beyond a certain point was a
violation of trust. Displays of anger, the inevitable consequence
of confrontation, meant exposing yourself. Life had taught him
to value the privacy he had enjoyed so little of.
In the crowded, close-knit world of miners cottages in which
hed grown up, privacy was virtually impossible to find. Even
going to the toilet was, to a degree, a public act; bathing in the
enamel tub in the kitchen on a Saturday night was, similarly, a
violation of a kind, even if it took place within the sanctuary of
64
the family home; he had slept in a room with seven other
people. The distance this deeply sensitive man would always
seek to keep between his inner self and the world outside was
determined by the unnatural extent to which others had
encroached upon his private world when he was young and
vulnerable. His exposure had been physical and emotional. The
loss of his father when he was six had left a void never
satisfactorily filled. This space, too, had been invaded or, at
least, occupied by a stranger, another violation, this time of the
spirit, from which he recoiled. Football was Matts way to his
own private self. And as his world, small at first, grew larger, its
imperatives became clearer to him. He learned the importance
of controlling his emotions and so developed his own non-
combative style.
Bullying offended him because it too was an attack on the
spirit. There are players, of course, who are too thick to
understand that they are being got at. The pejorative use of the
word thick is extremely uncharacteristic of Matt Busby. It
indicates the strength of his feelings about the crude, often
wounding, taunts to which young footballers were subjected in
the dressing-room. What had been got at was their private
selves where doubt and anxiety mingled with hopes and desires,
where young lads dreamed, where they could most easily be
hurt. He resented bullying for the same reason he rejected
confrontation as a means of righting footballs wrongs.
In many respects being a professional footballer in 1936 was
not unlike growing up as a Catholic in the Scotland of Matt
Busbys youth. The slave footballer was despised by his so-
called betters in much the same way as Scotlands Catholic
immigrants were despised by their Protestant neighbours. Both
were deemed untrustworthy, irresponsible and potentially
disloyal. This was the games administrators view of Meredith,
Roberts and Bloomfield, the early agitators for professionals
rights. The lesson of the early struggle to emancipate profes-
sional footballers, as perceived by Matt Busby and his genera-
tion of players, was that agitation was doomed to failure.
Confrontation was futile and ultimately demeaning, as much a
waste of time for footballers in the Thirties as it had been for the
65
Catholics of Busbys youth who'd traded sectarian abuse on the ;
street corners of Bellshill when drink had roused their emotions
on a Saturday night.
Slaves who got involved in slanging matches let themselves
down. Be they Catholics or footballers, their bitterness served
only to undermine their cause, dignity was sacrificed when you
behaved as the enemy expected you to. In Bellshill many
Catholics had proved their persecutors right, lent substance to
bigotry, proved that if power corrupts, powerlessness can be
even more corrupting. Powerlessness could induce feckless-
ness, as happened in professional soccer. Unable to win justice,
Billy Meredith and his contemporaries had traded their self-
respect for under-the-counter payments and worse. In 1915,
just before League football was suspended for the duration of
the war, Meredith and his Manchester United colleagues had
been involved in another match-fixing scandal. On Good
Friday 1915 Liverpool visited Old Trafford for a game United
had to win to avoid relegation. United duly won 2-0, but the
Old Trafford crowd booed and jeered the two sides towards the
end of the game. For days before the match rumours had
circulated in Manchester that the result was squared. The
casual approach of both sides  Liverpool in particular 
convinced many spectators that the rumours were correct.
Later it was revealed that bookmakers throughout England had
taken large bets predicting the 20 scoreline.
The subsequent Football Association inquiry found that
there had indeed been skulduggery. Eight players, four from
each club, were suspended for life, among them Merediths
close friend, Sandy Turnbull, who had scored the winning goal
when United won the FA Cup in 1907.
Their United colleague, Enoch Knocker West, denied his
guilt and took the FA to court. Meredith was called as a witness.
He denied being involved, although admitting that during the
first half he had come to the conclusion that something was
wrong. West lost his case. John Harding, Merediths
biographer, concluded; *. . . his part in this shabby business
seems to have been a peripheral one. Perhaps he watched the
furtive arrangements going on from the corner of the dressing-
room and simply turned a blind eye  he had seen it all before
66
and suffered the consequences. Perhaps he no longer cared
what went on among his colleagues.
Enslaved and denied respect, even the best of professional
football men could descend into fecklessness. Thus, men
deemed to be a lesser breed became the creatures of their
masters bigoted mythology, a caste from whom nothing more
than performing tricks was expected. Denied respect they lost
self-respect. Denied responsibility they behaved irresponsibly.
Nothing in professional soccer had changed very much
between 1915 and 1936. The maximum wage had risen from 4
to 8. Otherwise all was as it had been: the coarseness of the
dressing-room, the suspicion between castes; the ritual abuse of
the innocent; the isolation of those who sought reform. The
most protected footballer was the one who played with the
grace and courage of a hero whilst simultaneously knowing
his place. The Modest Hero was popular in the boardroom and
idealised by the sporting press. When directors and the public
had no more use for him, the Hero, whether injured or too old,
was supposed to fade away. Those who tried to fight the system
invariably lost.
Matt Busby was allowed to join Liverpool for 8,000 in March
1936. His injury had responded slowly to treatment, but
unfortunately too slowly for City, who thought he was finished,
his best footballing days behind him. Throughout this difficult
year he had, as always, behaved with dignity; experience having
taught him that the alternatives to dignity  impotent rage or
simmering resentment  were self-defeating. Now he knew that
he was powerless in all respects except one: he could control
himself. But this was not the only lesson his years at Manchester
City had taught him: he had also learned that service rendered
was soon forgotten. Another formative experience, to be
stored with all the others in that private world of his which
existed behind the facade of Genial Matt the Modest Hero.
Behind the mask a different man had been burn, a visionary
rather different from those whod gone before, a slave whose
eyes had been opened, who understood that before you could
effect change you had to aquire power, who saw clearly that if
footballs ills began at the top they couldn't be cured from the
bottom.
67
Perhaps my background had made mealittle older than my |
years, Busby modestly reflected in his autobiography, butlong 
before I moved from Manchester City to Liverpool I vowed that
if I ever became a manager I would respect players as
individuals who needed individual treatment and thereby try to
inspire respect from them. Busbys background had done more
than make hima little older than his years. And there is every
reason to believe that he had learned, from his own experiences
and those of others, not just how to exercise power but how to
acquire it. To this end the guise of Genial Matt the Modest
Hero esteemed by all was of inestimable value.
4

The Man on the Tram
Matt has always known what he is
and that has given him enormous
power.
Harold Riley

Football was still a young sport in 1936  the Football League
was barely twenty years older than Matt Busby  and the
professional game was still handicapped by its original
deformities. Great men had lent enchantment to the game by
their deeds on the field, and men like Billy Meredith and
Herbert Chapman had tried, with varying degrees of success, to
help their crippled love develop. But if Merediths pre-
occupation had been the professionals identity, what he was,
how he should be treated and rewarded, Herbert Chapmans
vision was strictly tactical. He had been concerned to make the
players function more efficiently as a team, and it was he who, in
pursuing this end, put trophies in the boardrooms of
Huddersfield and Arsenal.
By the time Matt Busby left Manchester City for Liverpool in
the spring of 1936, he had identified a problem more funda-
mental than those that concerned Meredith and Chapman.
Busbys analysis went deeper than the individual pro and the
team to the womb in which both were conceived: the club. For
most people football happened on Saturday afternoon. The
professional, manager or player, was judged by results on the
field. But Busby understood that those results were determined
by what happened on the training ground during the week. As
- things stood, the training ground, the place that ought to be a
university where skill and character were nurtured, was little
better than a playground for the senior pros, where they
amused themselves between performances. With the directors
69
away working at their businesses and professions, and the
manager in his office, leadership was left to the trainer, whose
status was considerably lower than head boy. Thus, the hours of
the week which mattered most passed anarchically. In all
playgrounds the bully is king, and so it was in football. The
victims were the young, those professionals in embryo, whose
talents withered as their dreams calloused, their spirits broken
by angry words or, worse perhaps, indifference.
This was the club away from the gaze of public and directors,
the club that was never written about in the newspapers and
magazines. This was professional football. This was far more,
far more real than the glorious atmosphere of a packed stadium
on a Saturday afternoon. This was what Busby vowed to
change. If he got the chance.
Some men see the world as it is and ask why, others dream of
things that have never been and ask why not? When Busby
thought about the gulfs in football the one that bothered him
most was between manager and players. Here, most critically,
leadership was required. The vacuum on the training ground
must be filled, for the training ground was the club, Saturday
afternoons merely a reflection of the happenings of the week,
good or, as was mostly the case, bad. The game on the field was
fashioned by the game off the field, the character of a
professional football club could no more be left to chance than
the character of a family. Like a family, a football club had to
have values, human values, a sense of fairness, decency and
justice. Also a sense of responsibility more profound than the
one Busby had known: the pithy call-to-arms ten minutes
before kick-off on a Saturday afternoon.
The Manchester City club Matt Busby chose to leave was
neither better nor worse-than others. The most important
things were left to chance. Since its inception professional
football had been preoccupied with money, football had tended
to be forgotten, and the club directors and the managers who
were their hired hands expended most of their energy and
imagination dealing with financial matters. This was particu-
larly true in Manchester where both the citys Football League
clubs had been tainted by scandal, and both had flirted with
bankruptcy. Commerce, via the adroit manoeuvring of Ernest
70
Mangnall and Billy Meredith, had bok the principal force at
play when the success of its professional footballers had
bestowed glory and a proud sense of its own identity on
Manchester. Manchesters football clubs were, therefore, more
commercial institutions engaged in the business of football than
sporting academies of the kind Matt Busby envisaged. The law
of the commercial jungle was more applicable than the values of
family or university and the gifted footballer was just another
valuable piece of merchandise.
Success was no insurance against the day your luck ran out 
even Matt Busby, the hero of the 1934 Cup Final, was a
disposable piece of merchandise little more than a year later.
Success in the atmosphere that prevailed at Maine Road was a
fragile commodity, a consequence of clever exploitation rather
than a just reward for the virtues of team spirit and clubmanship
to which all paid lip service. Success gained thus made men
greedy, induced smugness and vanity, strained loyalties rather
than strengthening them.
It was from this milieu that Matt Busby walked away without
regret. The following season, 1936/7, Manchester City won the
First Division championship. Within twelve months the club
was relegated to the Second Division. The football world was
amazed by Citys rapid decline. Along the East Lancs Road
Matt Busby was more convinced than ever that success gained
by dubious means was no success at all. A mere player, Matt
was in no position  yet  to right the worlds wrongs. He would,
however, later admit to some wistful reflection in the months
after leaving City, during which his old club seemed to flourish
while his new one hovered in the relegation zone: Liverpool
deserved success because they treated everyone on the staff as
human beings should be treated, with kindness, consideration
and understanding, he recalled. In contrast to many bigger
clubs, Liverpool were always prepared to reward good service,
even when they could so easily have evaded their obligations to
players whose first XI days were ended. As an example he cited
- Liverpools treatment of Jimmy McDougal, a distinguished
veteran who was reaching the end of his career when Matt
arrived at Anfield. Jimmy, a tremendous worker on the field,
had completed alittle less than the four years qualification
71
<on
period for his second benefit when the club decided to replace
him with Jimmy McInnes, bought from Third Lanark. Time
spent in the reserves didnt count towards your benefit, but, as
Busby explained, McDougal was re-signed on top wages
although he had lost his place, and the following year was again
signed at the maximum when he was not playing at all. When he
told the club he had decided to retire from football his second
benefit was paid to him. I well remember Liverpools handling
of McDougal. It made a big impression on me, and indeed on all
the players, because even though it was nothing more than just
reward for a loyal servant there were few clubs who would have
acted similarly in pre-war days. Before the war generosity was a
rare occurrence.
The man who made the difference between generosity and
the indifference common elsewhere was George Kay whod
been appointed Liverpool manager shortly before Matt Busby
arrived at Anfield. Kay promoted the value of loyalty
rewarded, being, in the McDougal case, the advocate who
persuaded the directors to do the right thing. Busby remem- ~
bered George Kay as, a very fine man and manager whom I
grew to admire, indeed I always regarded him as one of the best
I have ever met in this great game.
Busbys reference to this great game is a fascinating
reminder of how enduring mens love was for a sport which was,
in many respects, as Busby knew, far from great. Although he
won no honours during his three seasons at Anfield Busby
rediscovered footballs beauty, which compensated for every-
thing that was materially wrong with the sport.
The first task facing himself and George Kay when they
arrived was to save Liverpool from relegation to the Second
Division. Liverpool had won four First Division championships
since gaining promotion in 1905, but the last of them had been
in 1922/3 and since then the club had endured a more modest
existence. By 1936 a weak regime and some ageing players
had combined to leave them in the relegation zone with only a
handful of games left to play. Kay and Busby made the
difference and Liverpool survived. They had been a physical
side, a style which Kay set out to change over the next couple of
seasons using Busbys composed and authoritative presence to
72
set the tone. This role, in a side which never threatened to win
anything, provided Busby with his most satisfying spell as a
player. He had arrived as an expensive star but didnt act the
part. A senior pro himself now, Matt espoused the values which
had been absent in the Maine Road dressing-room. His
influence was felt on and off the field.
During his time at Liverpool Matt Busby grew from prince to
elder statesman. His natural ability as a footballer helped him
to command respect, but other more personal qualities began
to assert themselves. He was a kind, generous colleague,
patient always with those who were younger or less gifted. He
was also an attractive man, physically handsome and imposing
with a captivating smile and a baritone Scottish accent which
managed to sound, simultaneously, grave and gentle. The
reserved young pro was now serene. Where reserve had once
indicated shyness, serenity now suggested a strength which was
all the more potent for not obtruding. As he approached his
thirtieth year, Matt Busbys experiences fused with his natural
physical attributes to create an extraordinary presence which
left-an impression on all who met him. To this natural aura
Busby added his own effects. In David Millers biography of
Busby published in 1970, the author presents this remarkable
image from Liverpool 1938:
At about nine-thirty every morning a man boarded the tram
just to the east side of the Mersey Tunnel. As often as not,
already sitting there was someone noticeable for his tidy,
dapper appearance; fawn overcoat, trilby, pipe, newspaper a
bank manager, perhaps, or the man from the Pru. It was in fact
Matthew Busby, professional footballer, on his way to
Liverpool Football Club ground at Anfield.
The man boarding the tram was Busbys Anfield colleague,
Cliff Lloyd, who later became Secretary of the Professional
Footballers Association, which, a generation on, would
achieve many of the original aims of Merediths Players Union.
To Lloyd, himself an unusual professional footballer, Busby
was an incredibly charismatic figure. The Crombie overcoat,
trilby and pipe were to become Matt Busbys trademarks as he
grew to eminence in professional football. It is, however,
intriguing to reflect on the image he sought to cultivate during
73
#

his Liverpool years. In all other respects Matt was a man of 4
modest taste, unconcerned with style in matters like the carhe
would drive, the house he would live in, the food he would eat,
or indeed the social circles he would move in. Yet, in an era
when his peers were more commonly attired in cloth caps and
mufflers, Busby garbed himself in the uniform of the governing
classes. Lest anyone should doubt it, Matt Busby, professional
footballer, was no serf. This was confrontation without noise, a
subtle yet conscious rejection of old assumptions about his
caste.
Busby and Liverpool were good for each other. Not only did
he enhance his reputation as a player but the challenge of
transforming an ailing club forced him to put his ideas about
leadership to the test. In the year when Neville Chamberlain
returned from Munich with his piece of paper, Liverpool
vindicated his theories by beginning to move impressively up
the First Division table. Busby now felt certain that the qualities
he believed in worked, and the pleasure he derived from
playing was richer than ever. Always it was the game itself that
redeemed all the indignities and frustrations of its attendant
environment. On the pitch class asserted itself, courage was
rewarded, weakness punished. The humblest man, even the
most feckless, could conjure a moment of absolute beauty. As
its drama unfolded, the game revealed its truths. Those strong
in spirit invariably prevailed. This was as it should be, as it
rarely was once the final whistle was blown, when the venal
world once again encroached upon the spirit.
To the watching world professional football was glamorous.
Men dreamed of running onto the beautifully manicured pitch
in the colours of the team. They would do daring deeds, draw
roars of acclaim from the packed stadium, be recognised, have
their picture in the magazines and newspapers.
For the pro, especially one as well equipped as Matt Busby,
the joy was rather different. The hours before a match were
filled with fear and apprehension. Your stomach churned, the
shivers of anxiety raised pimples on your flesh, doubt seeped
into your soul. The heroes didnt look or feel like heroes in
those grim, pensive moments before the dressing-room door
opened and the noise of an expectant crowd hit you in the face.
74
These were the worse moments of the week. Except the weeks
you lost. You lived for the better times when you got a result,
the harder it came the more you savoured it. The joy was not
running onto the pitch but walking off, drained but victorious,
at the end. All fear banished, doubt dispelled, angry recrimina-
tion postponed. For a week at least. The professional wasnt
chasing glory, he was running away from failure. The game that
had at first been about mastering a toy was now about
conquering fear. Once a way of introducing yourself to others,
football, played by men for money, was now a means of
discovering things about yourself. And the men around you.
Respect was hard earned. You could deceive those watching,
but not those with whom you had gone into battle. There were
cheats, sunshine boys, who looked the part but never did the
business when they were needed. There were quiet men,
dependable and diligent, never noticed or given credit except
by the other players who understood their value. Some men
possessed raw physical courage, others were simply hard,
impervious to danger and thus never knowing fear. But there
was another quality, which Busby possessed, colloquially
known as balls. Writing about one of Matt Busbys last
performances for Liverpool, in its edition of 6 May 1939, the
Manchester Guardians critic observed, Busby is the gentlest
mannered and most philosophic of footballers. In a side which,
despite improvement, still found itself with its back to the wall
on too many occasions, Busby never shirked responsibility. He
wanted the ball, was never afraid, always coaxing by example.
The quality most difficult to discern from beyond the arena was
moral courage, the willingness to make mistakes for others, to
carry their burden on the days they weakened. This Matt did, in
the stylish, skilful, imaginative manner of the great Scottish
players hed admired as a boy. The contentment of the good
days was sublime.
Contentment was the drug the professional craved. . . more
_ than glory ... more than money ... more than anything.
Contentment was to be spiritually fulfilled beyond the
imaginings of the men who ruled you, who, however much they
owned, would never know or share this treasured sacrament.
For this feeling men from Meredith to Busby lived, devoted to
I
the game, hearts, as Meredith explained, full of it, oblivious
to footballs ignominious treatment of them, its failure to
respect or understand them. Between the Meredith and Busby
eras only the maximum wage had changed. Four pounds
became eight. Contempt remained constant.

The letter notifying Stanley Matthews of his selection for
England began, Dear Matthews. Tommy Lawton, Englands
centre-forward, was seen, by an FA official, to flourish the one
pound, ten shillings pittance he was paid for representing his
country and heard to say, Theres 70,000 here and this is all
were getting for turning out today. For this observation
Lawton: was dropped for Englands next two games. His
indiscretion was committed before a wartime international.
The reaction of England captain, Stan Cullis, was more typical:
We were only being paid thirty shillings for a match; even the
gatemen were getting more than we were, but there were two
million of our fellows fighting for their lives, and ours, and I
wasnt going to ask for more. I used to tell players how lucky we
were to be doing what we did. In the context of war this
rationale was plausible, but the philosophy that professionals
were lucky to be doing what [they] did was prevalent
whenever the subject of their working conditions was raised by
players with the intelligence and guts to baulk at their serf-like
existence. Lucky, professional footballers undoubtedly were,
for they were healthy, gifted and comparatively well paid. The
question was, with whom should they compare themselves?
The gateman? The average working man? Or the master
craftsman? At a time when the average working wage was 4 a
week professional footballers earned double that. So when they
reflected on the lot of the class theyd come from professionals
could convince themselves that they were indeed lucky. They
were doing something immensely satisfying and being better
paid than the fellows they had gone to school with. But this
argument was, as the more intelligent among them knew,
fallacious.
The average workman or master craftsman didnt pack
stadiums, didnt run the risk of career-ending injury every time
he went to work, and could of course expect his working life to
76
a

extend into old age. The master craftsman could change jobs
and charge the going rate for his work. If he worked harder and
produced finer products he would be better rewarded than his
peers. The comparison with the average worker was absurd.
Professional footballers were inordinately talented and to reach
the top of their trade they were required to make great
sacrifices, being unable to indulge in many of lifes pleasures as
others were. ;
The notion that an international footballer was lucky to be
doing what he did was preposterous. That such a proposition
could be credibly advanced by their more conservative col-
leagues to undermine the brave dressing-room spirits who
questioned the system says much about the degree to which a
sport conceived in a class-ridden society reflected the brutal
inanities of its origins. Powerful though they seemed, footballs
rulers, the J. C. Cleggs and C. E. Sutcliffes of the Busby,
Matthews, Lawton era, knew that tyrannical empires like theirs
were fragile, vulnerable to the voice of reason because they
were so preposterously unjust. Thus, the merest hint of dissent,
such as a professional like Tommy Lawton even daring to raise
the question of a thirty shilling international match fee, had to
be swiftly and disproportionately punished, and had to be seen
to be punished. Dear Matthews was another ritual humiliation
essential to remind the slave of his place in the order of things.
To call this professional Mr Matthews, or Stanley, might be
to encourage Matthews to believe that he had rights, and was
entitled to respect. From respect might come self-respect and
from that God knows where things would end.
Collectively, professionals of the pre-war years were as
lacking in self-respect as the men of Billy Merediths time. Had
they possessed respect for themselves they would not have
sought to compare their work with the mass of working people
but with the great entertainers of their time, in theatre, music-
hall or film. Here was the true comparison, with people who
_ werent lucky, but very special. Like the great entertainers,
professional footballers of the stature of Matthews, Lawton,
Carter, Finney, Cullis, Busby and James rendered ordinary
existence wondrous, romantic, tolerable. When presenting the
FA Cup in 1909, Lord Charles Beresford, Commander-in-Chief
77
of the Channel Fleet, referred to the importance of the occasion
in terms of morale to serving men and the community at large:
Members of the service read the papers and know the men who
have played this afternoon. I do not think I have seen finer
specimens of British humanity than those who played in this
game. Unfortunately the men from the Football Association
seemed not to have heard. For an hour or two each week the
fans who flocked to the nations football grounds experienced
beauty, grace, courage and wit. Even on the bad days there was
humour and a sense of community. There was always drama, an
escape from the mundane.
Nobody was more sensitive to the slights and injustice visited
upon the providers of football magic than Matt Busby. The man
in the Crombie overcoat, with trilby hat and pipe, had his own
way of declaring his independence. He knew the players
couldnt win so he waved no banners, caused no fuss  there was
no point in agitating. For him self-respect was a personal
matter. Nobody doubted Matt Busbys sense of himself. There
was more to his striking presence than bespoke tailoring.
The painter Harold Riley, for whom Busby later sat, himself
a Manchester United junior when Busby arrived to manage the
club after the war, offers this explanation of that presence: The
fascinating thing about Matt from a painters point of view is the
source of his undoubted charisma. I did portraits of two popes
and a couple of American presidents  and many other
powerful people  so one acquires a certain awareness of a
subject. What strikes me about Matt is, if you like, the
paradoxical quality of his charisma. People who are charismatic
are usually flamboyant. Now Matt is not a very flamboyant
person. In fact charisma comes from variable things and Matts
comes from his dignity. The quality Matt possesses reminds me
most of Pope Paul VI whose power also came from his great
dignity. Pope Paul was very dignified, almost academic,
whereas the present Pope has great charismatic flamboyance
which is almost electric. In Matts case its necessary to
distinguish between dignity and flamboyance. The thing about
Matt that is really very importantis the charismatic quality of
him as an individual because it was the power that actually
influenced people. And he still has that.
78
There is a real humility there which in a sense comes from a
very unassuming aspect of his character. He has always known
what he is and that has given him enormous power as well. He is
not an academic, or what he would consider an intellectual
person. What he is is somebody with great feelings and
powerful instincts and, I think, great personal and private
standards. His standards are very high. He is a man of great
principle. If people disappoint him, dont conform to those
standards, he will just step away.
Harold Rileys portrayal of Busby, offered with the benefit of
hindsight, is poignant when set against the tawdry reality of
pre-war English soccer. One can see why he commanded
respect and how, guided by his powerful instinct, he stepped
away from the politics of the dressing-room.
He has always known what he is and that has given him
enormous power.
Rileys reference to Busby knowing what he is, and the
enormous power derived from this, has particular relevance to
the years between 1939, when Neville Chamberlains declara-
tion of war on Germany signalled the premature end of Matts
playing career, and 1945 when he took over as manager of
Manchester United. What Busby understood  and this was the
source of the enormous power Riley refers to  was the
difference between peoples perception of him and the real
man. There was far more to him than the benign character he
projected, the gentle-mannered philosopher of the Guardian
profile who commanded respect and affection throughout the
game. He had what is known today as a good image. This was in
part due to his innate qualities but also, to a significant degree,
to a shrewd assessment of how best to adorn what was natural
while concealing his deepest convictions about the system of
which, as a professional player, he was a humble servant.
At the outbreak of war Matt Busby, although no more than
thirty, was a respected elder statesman among footballers. Had
* . he chosen to he could have voiced his views about the nature of
the game and urged reform upon its rulers. He chose instead to
conform. Knowing what he was, he knew the price that would
be extracted if he revealed who he really was; a man who was
offended by much of what he had witnessed in professional
79
football, who believed that radical change was necessary, who
was determined  if he got the chance  to do something about
it. The dignified, principled man with very high personal
standards described by Harold Riley might have been expected
to rail against the tawdry reality of the pre-war game. But Matt
Busby was wise, and interested in acquiring the power to
change things. To that end he kept his peace.
Matt Busby appeared to pose no threat to the established
order. On the contrary, those who ran football found him a
reassuring figure, and when people questioned footballs values
its administrators could point to Busby and other equally well
regarded contemporaries, like Stan Cullis, Joe Mercer and Cliff
Britton, to sustain the argument that the game made men rather
than demeaned them. The idea that Busby was the man he was,
despite rather than because of his experiences as a professional
would never have entered official minds. When preferment was
in the offing it was to these model professionals that the masters
turned. Stan Cullis was Englands captain. The fact that he felt
himself to be a lucky man, and behaved accordingly, would
not have hindered his promotion from the ranks. During the
war years Matt Busby would also be chosen to captain his
country, but that was not the summit of his ambitions.
When war was declared in September 1939 the Football
League was suspended. The previous month, with war immi-
nent, the professionals of Liverpool Football Club had volun-
teered en masse for the Territorial Army. Within weeks they
were called up for full-time military service. For thirty-year-old
Matt Busby the timing was unfortunate. A war of any signifi-
cant duration would almost certainly terminate his career as a
top-class player. Liverpool had finished eleventh in the First
Division in 1938/39, their highest placing since Kay and Busby
had arrived at Anfield. Both believed that the side would win
honours in the years ahead, a claim that is lent some substance
by the fact that Liverpool, led by Kay, won the First Division
championship when hostilities ceased in 1946/47.
War Office policy was that football should continue, but on
an ad hoc basis, with professionals free to guest for whichever
League club was nearest to their Forces base. It was further
decided that when on duty professional sportsmen could best
80
serve the war effort by acting as Physical Education instructors.
Their experience and distinction would help keep the troops fit
and in good heart.
Matt Busbys reputation preceded him into the Forces.
Stanley Rous, later to become Sir Stanley and the most
powerful legislator in the game, had been afirst class referee.
He was asked by the War Office to recommend suitable sports
players to join the Army and RAF Physical Training Staffs.
Rous, who had refereed the 1934 Cup Final in which Busby
played, now added Matts name to the list of those considered
officer material which he submitted to the authorities. After his
initial training he was sent to Aldershot where he became an
NCO with the title Company Sergeant-Major Instructor Busby.
Matt continued playing throughout his spell in the Army as a
guest for Reading, Aldershot, and Hibernian in Scotland. He
won seven more international caps, the last of them when his
country endured a crushing 6-1 defeat by England at Hampden
Park in 1945. :
More significantly, in terms of his future, Sergeant-Major
Busby vindicated Stanley Rouss estimation of his leadership
potential. When the Allies invaded Italy Busby was given
command of the British Army team sent to entertain the troops
behind the lines. His squad included some of the finest players
in Britain, drawn from the most distinguished clubs in the
game. As Officer-in-Charge of the team he was effectively its
player-manager. The experience of managing these players,
among them Joe Mercer, Frank Swift, Tommy Lawton and
Cliff Britton, proved invaluable. Matt had been used to having
influence at Liverpool, now he learned about power. He was
responsible for training, tactics and selection of the team.
Arthur Rowe, later to be one of the most respected post-war
managers with Spurs, was Busbys second-in-command.
Wielding authority in these circumstances was more complex
than at club level in peacetime. The imposition of discipline had
- to be tactful; this was war. Men (and women) tended to live for the
day, easing the anxieties of the time by breaching the norms of
behaviour that would apply in other circumstances. Busbys
leadership was further complicated by the fact that the men he was
responsible for were stars in their own right, their task now to play
81
es

mere exhibition games, in which the normal imperatives of 1
fitness and discipline were not as obviously important.
He wisely assessed the nature of his job and ruled with a light
touch, fostering a co-operative rather than authoritarian
regime. Tasks were delegated to each of his famous players.
There were to be no gulfs between manager and players in this
travelling football club. Joe Mercer was promoted to messing
officer or scrounger-in-chief with responsibility for putting
food on the table. Tommy Lawton and Frank Swift were jointly
in charge of all baggage. Cliff Britton got the transport
department. All felt committed to the success of the adventure.
They were a happy crew.
Busby and his men lived much more closely than normal.
Many hours were spent off-duty, hours of conversation and
reminiscence, much of it light-hearted, some more reflective
and serious. It was during these sessions that Busby discovered
that the ills he had identified in football were widespread,
common to the experience of players with the best of Britains
clubs. The Manchester City of his time had been the rule rather
than the exception.
Listening to the great professionals gathered round him late
at night behind the front line, Busby began to develop his
convictions about his craft. However great the player, however
renowned the club, the problems seemed to be the same.
Pettiness, humiliation, greed and injustice, bullying and cheat-
ing, the gulf between master and slave ran deep and wide. Each
anecdote confirmed this sorry reality.
The stories invariably featured managers who were either
yes-men or bullies, occasionally both. Directors who blustered
and bungled, who were snobs affecting disdain also figured, as
well as footballers who were bitter, resentful and greedy.
Before the war ended many of the ideas Busby had nurtured for
years had taken shape, one more insistently than all the others;
that a football club could not function without management
that was firm yet fair. Directors who thought they could pick the
team and use the manager as an errand-boy would have to be
put in their place. Players who thought the game was awash
with money, who were feckless, irresponsible or bullies would
be subject to discipline, put very firmly in their place.
82
Power on a day-to-day basis must devolve to the man whose
job it was to run the club, who was, after all, answerable to
players, directors and supporters  the manager. All were
dependent on each other. A football club should be like a
family with a manager at its head. Sergeant-Major Matt Busby
had redefined the role of the modern manager. He now had to
find a football club that would let him have his way.
5
The Job
Mr Busby has ideas and a rare
honesty of purpose.
James Gibson, Chairman of
Manchester United

Manchester
15th December 1944

Dear Matt,
No doubt you will be surprised to get this letter from
your old pal Louis. Well Matt I have been trying for the
past month to find you and not having your Reg. address I
could not trust a letter going to Liverpool, as what I have
to say is so important. I dont know if you have considered
about what you are going to do when war is over, but I
have a great job for. you if you are willing to take it on. Will
you get into touch with me at the above address and when
you do I can explain things to you better, when I know
there will be no danger of interception. Now Matt I hope
this is plain to you. You see I have not forgotten my old
friend either in my prayers or in your future welfare. I hope
your good wife and family are all well and please God you
will soon be home to join their happy circle.
Wishing you a very Happy Xmas and a lucky New Year.
With all Gods Blessings in you and yours

Your Old Pal
Louis Rocca

Louis Roccas letter was typical of him: a touch conspiratorial, a
dash of piety, mention of the good wife and family, signing off
Your Old Pal. Louis was everyones old pal. He was a fixer
whod served Manchester United for nearly fifty years when he
wrote to Matt Busby in late 1944. Louis had joined the club as a
84
tea-boy in the 1890s when United was still known as Newton
Heath. He would occasionally claim that it was he who suggested
the name Manchester United when the club decided to abandon
the original Newton Heath in 1902. He was nineteen at the time.
He must have been an influential office-boy.
When Louis wrote to Busby he held the titles assistant-
manager and chief scout. The great job he referred to was
manager of Manchester United. The club hadnt had a proper
manager since Scott Duncan resigned in 1937. Club secretary
Walter Crickmer had filled in as manager since Duncans
departure.
United had been Manchesters second club for almost twenty
years, and during that time had survived some traumatic
experiences, most of them to do with finance. J. H. Davis, who
had saved the club in the early 1900s and financed the ambitions
of Ernest Mangnall and Billy Meredith, died in October 1927.
At a board meeting on 25 October the directors referred with
reverence to the passing of the President, Mr. J. H. Davis, and
deeply deplored his loss to the club. The minutes of that
meeting conclude, it was unanimously resolved that the
deepest sympathy and condolences be conveyed to Mrs Davis
and family in their sad bereavement and that she may be
comforted by Divine Consolation in her very trying ordeal.
The death of this great benefactor heralded the most
desperate period in Uniteds history. The club was in the First
Division and, ironically, had felt economically secure enough
just before Davis died to decide to clear the mortgage debt on
the Old Trafford ground. By 1927 United had reduced a debt of
38,000 to 15,000. Always ambitious in Daviss time, the
diminishing debt encouraged the ultimate aspiration to own the
magnificent stadium at Old Trafford.
Three years later survival was back on the agenda. There
were a number of contributory factors to this change of fortune.
The depression of the late Twenties had grievously hurt the city
-and football had become a luxury fewer people could afford.
More of them chose to spend their money watching City, who
were riding high while United were struggling at the bottom of
the first Division. In these trying times J. H. Daviss money and
entrepreneurial flair were badly missed.
85
In the 1930/31 season these factors combined with a 
disastrous spell on the field to threaten Uniteds existence asa
Football League club. By mid-October 1930 they were bottom
of the First Division. They had lost all eleven of their opening
League fixtures, some spectacularly. After a 51 defeat by
West Ham the Supporters Club called a public meeting for
Friday, 17 October, the eve of one of the seasons most
attractive home fixtures against the FA Cup holders, Arsenal.
Over three thousand angry Mancunians packed Hulme Town
Hall. United had stood on the brink of relegation every season
since returning to the First Division in 1925, and the fans were
ready to take the Board to task. They accused it of lacking
ambition and, as a result, of spending no money on quality
players. The MeredithRoberts-Turnbull era had given
United fans a penchant for stars. Now City was the club in
Manchester, Uniteds lack of enterprise having just been
highlighted by their neighbours signing of a whole forward
line for big money.
To noisy acclaim the Hulme Town Hall gathering approved
two motions proposed by Supporters Club secretary, Mr
Greenhough: 1) there was no confidence in the Board of
Directors; 2) the following days game against Arsenal would
be boycotted. Among those who spoke against the second
motion was Charlie Roberts, a hero of better days, who said the
players had his deepest sympathy.
It is impossible to gauge how successful the call for a boycott
was. Newspapers speculated that the visit of Arsenal might
attract a crowd of 50,000. However, it rained heavily in
Manchester on the day and the attendance, estimated between
25,000 and 30,000 was probably only marginally affected by the
anger expressed the previous night. United lost 21 to the Cup
holders. Seven days later they lost 4-1 at Portsmouth.
With relegation inevitable, attendances slumped dramatic-
ally through the winter months. Only once in those darks days
which preceded the drop to Division Two did the Old Trafford
crowd exceed 10,000 and that was against Manchester City. On
4 May 1931 Manchester United drew 44 with Middlesborough
at Old Trafford. Both clubs were going down. Both had gained
just 22 points that season, the lowest total ever recorded in the
86
First Division. United had won seven games and conceded an
astonishing 115 goals.
The seasons final fixture, against Middlesborough, drew a
mere 3,900 spectators to the magnificent ground Mangnall and
Davis had conceived and built in the glorious early years of the
century. There was, according to newspaper reports of May
1931, an uncanny atmosphere in Old Trafford that day. The
terraces stood empty, the shouts of derision echoing through
the empty grandstand. On this desperate afternoon those
belonging to the club who were present to witness its darkest
hour felt a tinge of envy for Herbert Bamlett, the hapless
manager United had dismissed two months before.
Prominent among the mourners were Louis Rocca and
Walter Crickmer, who was now the secretary-manager. Things
would deteriorate rapidly through the coming months. The
ultimate calamity of insolvency was a real threat, for the
balance sheet for 1931 showed debt spiralling beyond control.
The mortgage on the ground stood at 17,849.18s.8d. Sundry
creditors were owed 11,222. The bank overdraft was 2,105
and cash in hand was only 12.12s.9d. There was no guardian
angel to underwrite these debts. But Uniteds plight attracted
little sympathy. In the wider economy businesses were daily
going to the wall.
Survival depended upon the contrasting talents of Rocca and
Crickmer. Louis promised cheap players and undertook to
spread his emollient charm around the city in search of a
wealthy saviour. The sterner task of soothing creditors fell to
Crickmer, who looked what he was, respectable, honest and
competent. He begged the Brewery Company who held the
mortgage on Old Trafford to allow the interest payments to
lapse for a while. Permission to pay certain road charges in
instalments was sought from Stretford Urban District Council.
Both requests were granted, reluctantly. The Inland Revenue
also settled for promises. Billy Behan, later to become Uniteds
_ renowned Irish scout, was a reserve goalkeeper at Old Trafford
during this destitute period. We often sat in the dressing-room
until half-one or two oclock on a Friday waiting for our wages,
Behan remembers, but they always came. In fact that was not
the case. On Friday 18 December Walter Crickmer was politely
87
but firmly turned away from the National Provincial Bank in q
Spring Gardens, Manchester. Crickmer returned empty-
handed to the waiting players at Old Trafford. The game was up
or so it seemed, until Louis Roccas streetwise instinct led him
to Mr J. W. Gibson, a partner in the Manchester clothing firm
of Biggs, Jones, Gibson Ltd. Louis had heard a whisper that
Jimmy Gibson, a man with various business interests, was an
enthusiast who just might be persuaded to get involved if the
worst came to the worst. That weekend Louis turned the trick.
Gibson immediately placed 2,000 at the clubs disposal,
enough to pay the wages for three weeks. Mr Gibson was a
realist. He made it clear to the press that there would be limits
to his generosity. If the public responded to the crisis by turning
up to support the team, he pledged a more substantial sum of
money would be made available to employ a new manager and
buy good players. If, however, his initial gesture failed to touch
the publics heart Gibson indicated that he would withdraw.
Money was so tight that a decision was taken not to re-engage
the band who entertained the crowds at Old Trafford. But as
the band-master offered to reduce his fee to 2.2s.0d. per match
the directors changed their minds.
On Christmas Day the people of Manchester played their
part in salvaging their impoverished second football club:
33,312 spectators watched the team beat Wolves 3-2 in a
Second Division game. Some measure of the depth of emotion
which attended this occasion, engulfing all present, but particu-
larly the players, can be gained by reflecting on the scoreline of
the following days return fixture at Molineux; Wolves won 7
0. Christmas Day had been enough to convince James Gibson;
public and players had given their answer; glimpsing magic
through the gloom, the agnostic benefactor was converted to
the cause.
At a press conference the next day Gibson spoke enthusi-
astically about the revived club. He promised that old glory
would be restored. Among those he publicly wished to thank
was one C. E. Sutcliffe, Merediths old adversary who, as
Vice-President of the Football League, had approved the
rescue package. Gibson thanked with equal sincerity the sender
of a postal order for one shilling from a working man who said
88
he was never able to get to matches on Saturdays but hoped that
his mite would help to keep the old Club together. Gibson
closed his press conference with a reference to the ancient
tenets promulgated in another context by King James I: A
football interest, Gibson proposed, was a very important
factor in maintaining contented and healthy-minded work-
people.
These dramatic events were watched from across the city by
young Matt Busby who had recently survived traumas of his
own and was now an established first team player at Maine
Road. The rivalry between the two clubs had always been
friendly. On 20 January 1932, City held their Annual Hot-pot
and Social at the Stock Exchange Restaurant. In his after-
dinner speech, Citys chairman, Albert Hughes, urged his
guests to do all they could to support Uniteds fight for survival.

Louis Rocca had rendered United a great service. In the clubs
mythology Rocca is the football scout of infinite wisdom. The
truth is that Louis knew more about people and the city of his
birth than he did about the game. He wasnt so much a judge of
a player as the man who knew a man who'd heard about a
talented youngster. His resourcefulness proved to be one of
Manchester Uniteds greatest assets in the years between the
Gibson rescue and 1944 when he wrote his carefully couched
letter to Matt Busby.
The clubs fortunes fluctuated wildly in the pre-war era. In
1934 United travelled to Millwall for the final Second Division
game, needing a win to avoid relegation to the Third Division
North. A new manager, Scott Duncan, had been appointed in
1932 but money remained a problem and on 5 May 1934, a
fortnight after Matt Busby had won his FA Cup winners medal
with City, Millwall were favourites to gain a victory in a game
that would ensure their own survival in the Second Division.
Thirty-five thousand people packed The Den. Against the odds
_ United silenced the raucous Docklands crowd by scoring two
goals without reply, thus avoiding the humiliation of Division
Three North. Later that Saturday night more than 3,000
jubilant United fans turned up at Central Station to welcome
the team home.
89
a
In 1936 United won promotion back to the First Division only
to be relegated again twelve months later. In 1937 Scott Duncan
resigned. The club had decided on some policy changes which
left Duncan feeling his position was untenable, and he left to
manage non-league Ipswich Town. The main plank of Uniteds
new policy was to devote more money to ground improvements
and concentrate on a youth policy through the newly created
Manchester United Junior Athletic Club (MUJAC).
Although later credited to Matt Busby, the philosophy of
producing home-bred youngsters was introduced by James
Gibson in 1931. At a Board meeting that year Gibson spoke of
the advisability of running a colts or nursery team from next
season: The principle laid down was that the job of cultivating
young players must be thoroughly done to be effective, so that
a common idea and technique shall unite the junior with the
senior members of the playing staff. The philosophy and
indeed the language was identical to that espoused by Busby
and Jimmy Murphy a decade later.
Walter Crickmer replaced Duncan with his old title of
Secretary-Manager. Louis Rocca bearing the title Chief-Scout
was in fact what might in these days be called Special Adviser to
the Chairman, and anyone else who needed guidance on
matters as diverse as the cost of footballs, the latest prodigy
hed heard of in Manchester schoolboy football, or how much
to bung in under-the-counter payments where they were
necessary to seduce new signings. Rocca was responsible for the
appointment of Tom Curry and Bill Inglis as trainers.
Three of the greatest players in Manchester Uniteds history
were acquired during this period when strictly speaking there
wasnt a footballing brain on the administrative side of the club.
Rocca is credited in Uniteds history books with the signing of
Johnny Carey, captain of the first great Busby team. An
analysis of the Carey deal sheds some light on Roccas modus
operandi. He had heard of a player called Benny Gaughan who
was playing with the Dublin club Bohemians. Together with
Scott Duncan, then still in charge, Rocca travelled to Dublin in
November 1936. Billy Behan who had retired to his native city
acted, informally, as his old pals guide in Dublin. They
watched Gaughan and decided to sign him. They were told that
90
the deal would cost 200. Not having cash they were stymied,
because, as this would be an under-the-counter payment, they
couldnt sign a cheque. It was agreed that they would return the
following week with the money. Meanwhile, Glasgow Celtic
snatched the prize from Bohemians for 300. Not knowing what
had happened, Louis Rocca arrived back in Dublin, cash in
hand. Billy Behan recalls, Louis was nearly crying. Look, I
told him, theres a much better player than Gaughan in the
country. Wait until Sunday and Ill take you to see him. 
Johnny Carey played brilliantly for St Jamess Gate on that
Saturday and Rocca paid the 200 for his signature.
Louis Roccas faith in Billy Behan was, arguably, as
important as any footballing knowledge in the acquisition of
Carey who was to become one of Uniteds greatest players.
Jack Rowley was signed in equally unscientific circum-
stances. Jimmy Gibson liked to spend his weekends in the
bracing air of Bournemouth. Onavisit to the south coast in
1937 Gibson attended the local League clubs fixture where he
spotted Rowley and promptly did a deal which took the centre-
forward to Old Trafford for 3,500.
Stan Pearson was signed from local junior soccer following a
tip-off to Rocca, and later in 1938 a young wing-half called
Chilton arrived from the north-east. That year United,
managed by Walter Crickmer, regained First Division status.
James Gibson was not typical of the Boardroom class. He
was an old-fashioned paternalist, a patron rather than a
parasite, concerned not simply with success measured by cups,
medals and glory, but with the greater good of the community
to which he belonged. At the AGM of 1939 he expressed the
following ambition when reporting another successful MUJAC
season: It is from these unusually comprehensive nurseries that
the Club hopes an all-Manchester team at some distant period
might be produced.
Between them Gibson, Rocca and Crickmer had laid extra-
_ordinary foundations for the kind of professional football club
hitherto unknown, a club with a noble philosophy, the kind of
institution Matt Busby had quietly aspired to belong to since
hed entered the professional game.
At Uniteds last AGM before the war James Gibson spoke
91
proudly of the season just ended. The first team had finished 1
fourteenth in the First Division. But, he argued, the clubs 
promise for the future lay in the performances of the reserves
and juniors. The reserves had won the Central League for the
first time in eighteen years; the A team, average age seven-
teen, had won the open-age Manchester League, and the
MUJACs their division of the Chorlton League. We have,
Gibson proclaimed, no intention of buying any more mediocri-
ties. In years to come we will have a Manchester United
composed of Manchester players.
A sad note was struck when the meeting was informed of the
death of Charlie Roberts, the greatest captain Manchester
United ever possessed. A message of condolence was con-
veyed to Robertss widow. Thirty years after he, Meredith and
Bloomfield had been pilloried for seeking a just and decent
world for professional players, Roberts was offered a valedic-
tory morsel in a Manchester Guardian obituary which alluded to
his great service to the game in the widest sphere. Recalling his
contribution to the formation of the Players Union the
Guardian concluded: Today the Union flourishes. It is not an
unworthy memorial to a great player and a great sportsman.
The reality of the Players Union of 1939 was that it was a mouse
which seldom shouted, much less roared. Far from flourishing,
the Union was neither a memorial to Roberts nor a vehicle for
reform. Except as imagined in the noble thoughts of James
Gibson and Matt Busby, professional soccer in 1939 was what it
had always been, more a mirror on an indecent society than a
memorial for decent men.
Matt Busby was excited by Louis Roccas letter. He knew
that United were looking for a manager and this was the job
hed secretly set his heart on. He was also aware of Roccas
influence at Old Trafford, particularly with Jimmy Gibson.
Liverpool had already offered him a coaching job, as had
Reading. Ayr United in Scotland promised the job of team
manager. But Manchester United was the perfect opportunity
provided the terms were right. Money wasnt going to be
the issue, authority was what mattered. The ideas Busby had
about the football managers role were radical. He wanted to be
Boss not office-boy. Being in charge was, he knew, different
92
from being responsible. Responsibility without power held no
attraction for him.
United was a big club in all but achievement. Their last major
trophy, the First Division Championship, had: been won in
1911. Expectations wouldnt be as great as at other equally
large clubs, but Matt knew he would have time, and he knew
United had some good players. The club had been pleased to
finish fourteenth in 1939. Matt could do better than that.
The RoccaBusby connection went back a long way. Louis
Rocca was a Catholic, a Manchester Catholic who had met and
admired Matt Busby, the Manchester City player.
The young Catholic footballer, stylish and dignified, had
done well by his faith in a city bearing a residue of vicious anti-
Catholic prejudice. A long time had passed since the
Manchester Guardian had editorialised on newly arrived Irish
Catholics as follows: The extensive immigration of poor Irish
has inflicted a deadly blow upon the health and comfort of the
working class. They are a most serious evil with which our
labouring classes have to contend. Louis Rocca and Paddy
McGrath, Catholic friends of Matt, grew up contending with
the legacy of hatred formed by diatribes such as this. It was
tough being a Collyhurst Catholic in the Twenties. Catholicism
in Collyhurst went back to the Reformation, after which it is
claimed the first Catholic church bells rang in the local church.
McGrath and Rocca could remember newspaper ads for jobs
declaring, No Catholics or Jews need apply. This prejudice
spilled over into sport. Paddy McGrath went to school with
Charlie Stiles, Nobbys dad, at St Pats in Collyhurst: Charlie
was a great footballer, but hed no chance of playing for
Manchester Boys. Catholics were never picked. Charlie played
for North Manchester. That was it. Even the referees were
biased against Catholic school teams. They used to have a cup
called the Daily Dispatch Shield and the decisions went against
us every time. Our teacher Mr Mclvor finally stopped us
entering the competition cause you wouldnt get a fair crack of
the whip, McGrath recalls.
To men like Rocca and McGrath, Matt Busby was more than
a football idol. Busby was the most prominent Catholic in
Manchester public life, a symbol of the faith to which he
93
belonged, a Catholic admired and respected, around whom his
co-religionists could proudly rally. Thus, Matt and Louis Rocca
became acquainted, socialised and contributed wherever they
could to the Catholic cause.
When he first arrived at Maine Road young Matt Busby was,
according to McGrath, victim of a bigoted aside by a senior
professional. There was a fella called Bell whose father was a
Presbyterian minister, I think he was a Mason, who had a go at
Matt early on. He was very hurt. I think he thought hed left all
that behind in Scotland.
Manchester was different. There were more minorities than
in most other English cities, all in their own way victims of
prejudice. A census of Manchester and Salford towns in 1851
showed that of the 400,000 inhabitants 220,000 had been born
elsewhere. The scope for serious bigotry was, therefore,
somewhat limited. The outsiders, first or second generation
Catholics, Jews, and Italians shared common ground, more
acreage than the bigots. Manchester was their city although in
the 20s and 30s this was yet to be established.
Matt Busby was drawn back to this cosmopolitan atmos-
phere. Manchester had the feel of a place where things werent
yet decided, where identity could be determined by the kind of
person you were  and the things you did  rather than the tribe
you belonged to; Manchester was still working out its identity.
Football had played a significant role in the creation of the citys
image of itself. Billy Merediths flamboyance and his romantic
rebellion against conservatism had found an echo in
Manchesters soul. The outsider triumphant nourished this
community which was, more than most, composed of drifters
who had followed their star.
The character of Manchester and Salford owes a great deal
to the Irish/Jewish/Italian influences, Harold Riley explains.
Marx and Engels were Jews who lived and worked in
Manchester and Salford. Engels owned Winterbothams Mill in
Salford which was one of the most profitable businesses in the
area. Marx worked in Manchester for a long time and Engels
financed him. At the same time the Irish arrived in Manchester.
They came up on the Ship Canal, they were called navigators,
hence the origin of the word navvy. But the Irish presence
94
goes back a long way. The first Irish were brought there by the
De Traffords. They were a Catholic family, and persecuted for
it at the time of the Reformation, but they were the biggest
land-owners in the area and owned the ground where United
play, Old Trafford. The De Traffords brought the educated
Irish as doctors, lawyers, solicitors and priests and they built a
foundation in the community for the workers who came at the
time of the Industrial Revolution.
So for Catholics, whether Irish, Scots or Italian, Manchester
was fertile ground for the planting of new roots. For the Busbys,
Roccas and McGraths as for the Jews, there was a sense of
place, of belonging. The Irish, Jewish and Italian communities
formed an interesting triangle in the city, Riley says.
Interesting and comforting, each minority had important
shared values and characteristics. Family mattered. Loyalty to
your own was a guiding principle. Characters, rogues with
charm and humour, were part of every Jewish/Irish/Italian
familys folklore. There was a Jimmy Greer in most outsiders
families, and a tolerance for human frailty, for the generous,
the extravagant, the big-spender who was just as often skint.
Desperation was understood, as was forgiveness. These were
warm, sensuous people, earthy in a most un-English way.
The Protestant ethos of men like Sir Harry Platt, the founder
of the great engineering works in the nineteenth century, was
present too, its values espoused by the Scottish and Welsh
working-classes who worked alongside the Catholics in factory
and mill. But Italian charm and Irish laughter mellowed all but
the fiercest adherents to Protestantism. The blood of Man-
chester was mixed in delightful proportion. It seemed to Matt
Busby the most human of places when he contemplated going
back in 1945.
That humanity was reflected at all levels in the citys cultural
life. The pubs filled up in the evening and nightclubs and
dancehalls were full and merry. The laughter was good-
natured, often self-deprecating. Inhibitions were cast away in
the seductive gloom of a Manchester night, as people whose
souls had been touched by hardship reached with lusty relish for
fruit scarce or forbidden on other nights when money was
short or the guilt of an Irish, Jewish, Italian psyche
95
prevailed, conscience winning the battle with the spirit. 1
Manchester wasnt Paris or New York, but it wasnt Birming-
ham, Sheffield or London either. There was a hint of Rome or 
Dublin, without the decadence of Protestantism purging its
angst. The gloom of this city was lit by gaiety. Manchester was a
small town, everything was within feeling or touching distance.
You could play or not. You could simply console yourself that
raw and generous life was in town if you wanted.
Manchesters culture was further enriched by its thriving
theatrical tradition. Harold Riley remembers: When we were
at school we had phenomenal theatrical contests. It was from
this that people like Albert Finney and Sheelagh Delaney,
Jimmy Jewel, and Ben Kingsley emerged. The actors Robert
Powell and Bernard Hill, Dame Wendy Hiller and the play-
wrights Trevor Griffiths and Robert Bolt all hailed from this
unusual provincial city. Miss Hornimans famous theatre was in
Manchester and she would bring stars like Dame Sybil
Thorndyke and Lewis Cassell from the United States. Beckett
put on his first nights here, it was tradition that attracted him.
Others were attracted by the dog tracks, the racecourse and
the gambling clubs, legal and illegal. You could sample most of
lifes pleasures, high-life and low, within a square-mile or two of
the citys heart. Sport and culture dissolved all differences:
Matt Busby, Sir John Barbirolli, Beckett, Dame Sybil
Thorndyke and in Salford Lowry the painter making his
matchstick men and women. Harold Riley, a Fellow of the
Royal Academy, illustrates how cohesive and different from
London this town was. The gap between art and sport was
narrower, between people of all kinds and classes. Sport was
very often the binding force as Riley explains: I was born in
Salford and have lived here practically all my life. My father and
brother were City supporters. I was always a United fan
because of Stan Pearson. The Pearson family lived on the same
road as we did and Stan was a great idol. His brother Albert, the
younger brother, was a very fine footballer and he used to play
with us.
Riley was born on 31 December 1934. I went to the local
grammar school and from there to a state school which is part of
the University of London. I won a painting scholarship which
96
a
allowed me a year in Rome and another year in Florence. Then
I had a British Council scholarship which enabled me to live
wherever I wanted for a year. I chose Castille. Not many people
wanted to go to Spain in the Fifties. After two years National
Service I came back to Salford in the early Fifties. The purpose
of coming back was to continue the project of L. S. Lowry. He
started to paint Salford at the beginning of the century, to
record the place, which is the work I continue.
Riley was a gifted young footballer who played for Salford
Boys. I always went to Old Trafford when I could. Once he
persuaded Lowry to go with him. He was alife-long City
supporter, Riley smiles, who had vowed he would never go on
Uniteds ground. We went one Saturday. I took him to the
place I always stood, not the Stretford End, the other end
where the old scoreboard used to be. I stood there for years
with a few cronies. Lowry amazed me by describing very clearly
and lucidly  he even made sketches for me  how he
remembered all of the Meredith era. He told me in absolute
detail of a game between Manchester City and Brighton
Towers, who were afirst division team at that stage, and how
Billy Meredith mesmerized everyone present.
Through the Arts, theatre and sport, Manchester people got
to know each other. There was nothing contrived, as at other
times in other places there would be, about the attendance at
Old Trafford of the painters Riley and Lowry. This was not the
Dickie Attenborough-at-Chelsea syndrome. It seemed as
natural for the painters to be on the terraces at Old Trafford
alongside clerks and factory workers as for the self-made
businessman to attend Miss Hornimans Theatre or Becketts
first night. The communal intimacy was real and entertainment,
the Arts and sport were the points of contact. One night
Barbirolli would perform with the Halle orchestra, the next
Frank Sinatra would play the same venue. The audiences would
not be identical but there would be a surprising number of the
same faces and many of them would not be unknown at the
racecourse or at Old Trafford or Maine Road.
Ideas about respectability were not formed as rigidly in
Manchester as elsewhere. Almost everyone had a past of kinds,
old money was rare. There was no aristocracy, except of those
97
who made things or sold them or otherwise excelled, even if it 4
was only at the art of living. The Prince of Punters, Alex Bird 
was a fabled Mancunian. He was born in the converted
Travellers Rest pub in Newton Heath where his coal merchant
father was a part-time street bookmaker. His legendary tilts at
the betting ring made him one of the few who have ever become
wealthy through professional gambling. As a result of success-
ful gambles  investments he liked to call them  Bird acquired
a series of Rolls Royces, his own aeroplane, a string of
racehorses and a sixteenth-century moated manor house set in
twenty-five acres of lush Cheshire land.
The great Blondini was a Gorton lad of Irish descent, Mike
Costello. He achieved worldwide fame when he was buried in a
coffin for seventy-eight days at Belle Vue for a 500 wager.
Another favourite Blondini stunt was to be in an ordinary coffin
blown apart by dynamite.
Alcock and Brown, the men who made the first Atlantic
crossing by air in 1919 were Manchester men, Brown from
Chorlton-cum-Hardy, Alcock from Ladybarn. Both were
pupils of Manchester Central High School. They were knighted
_ after their historic flight.
This uniquely human town that was so short on snobbery and
bitterness was the place Matt Busby wanted to live in. There
was another side to his character, a private personality
curiously at odds with the gentlemanly mien of public percep-
tion. He was no playboy, but he loved characters whose spirits
were freer than his own. Jimmy Greer would have loved
Manchester, its looseness, its joie de vivre, its tolerance. Matt
didnt play but he liked to spectate, to be in the company of
larger-than-life characters in his leisure time. He also liked a bet
on dogs and horses, a serious bet which meant one that hurt a
little if you lost. From his playing days he frequented the Belle
Vue and White City greyhound tracks and never missed the
chance to go racing. He drank little, the odd beer to be sociable.
In good company he was good company, occasionally at parties
he would give a fine rendition of Harry Lauders I Belong to
Glasgow. One of the happy enduring memories of his youth
was of going to the Glasgow Empire with Jimmy Greer to see
the great music hall acts of the day. Jean had matured into a
98
vivacious woman. She loved to go to the shows and her easy
warm personality made her the perfect companion for Matt
who, when not in the company of intimates, was uneasy with
the banality of cocktail-party chatter. Jean loved Manchester.
She knew more than most about being an outsider. Man-
chesters comforting, cosmopolitan embrace was as soothing
for her as for her eminent husband.
Busbys public persona won him admiration and respect. The
private man attracted affection. In the company of football
people, rogues and colourful self-made men, the kind of
company he liked to keep, he was affable and generous. He
didnt want to be the life and soul of the party, yet he loved the
banter, the light undemanding hail-fellow-well-metship of
dog-track, pub or party.
The Catholic Sportsmen Club met in such an atmosphere.
The Club met several times a year at social functions put on to
raise money for charity. The patrons were the better off
Catholics in Manchester. The Sportsmen Club was a way of
keeping in touch  with each other and their roots  and of
raising money for the less well off members of their tribe, many
of whom were new immigrants to the city. Louis Rocca was a
prominent member of the Club to whose activities Matt had
always. contributed by his presence. It was Rocca who arranged
for Matt to see James Gibson about the United job. The
meeting, initiated by Busby, took place when he was on leave
from his Army duties in early February 1945.
Busby and Gibson met at Cornbrook Cold Storage, one of
the businessmans companies about a mile from Old Trafford.
They found much common ground. Busby impressed Gibson.
Reporting tohis Board of Directors on 15 February, Gibson
spoke of Mr Busbys ideas and honesty of purpose. This dry,
minuted reference to their first meeting hardly conveys the
intensity of the discussion which took place. Gibsons vision of
what a football cllub should be was not in conflict with Busbys
_own ideas. The question they focused on was how best their
shared vision could be achieved. For Busby the time for
deference had passed. Always respectful of authority, or at
least capable of projecting respect, Sergeant-Major Busby now
demanded that the post of manager of Manchester United
99
should carry with it power commensurate to the responsibility 
he would bear. As manager he insisted on managing. He would
appoint his own staff and exercise absolute control over all
matters that affected the playing side of the game. What Busby
thought was, as he remembers, unheard of at the time. The
honesty of purpose alluded to in Gibsons account of their
meeting was diplomatic language for the degree of uncompro-
mising conviction with which Busby outlined his views on the
role of the manager. The ideas were radical, revolutionary
even, yet they were presented in a reasoned low-key manner
which was impressive. Offered a three-year contract, Busby
explained that the kind of club he and Gibson aspired to would
take time to build, and a five-year agreement would therefore
be more appropriate.
Any reservations Gibson may have had about the demands
being made of him were balanced by Busbys assurance that he
would not be extravagant with the clubs money; on the
contrary, he declared, financial prudence would be of the
essence, a fundamental value, of the club he proposed to lead.
From Billy Merediths time, through the years when Busby
himself had arrived at Maine Road only to be discouraged by
Citys decision to purchase a complete forward-line in one
expensive raid on the transfer-market, Manchesters football
clubs had traditionally sought to buy success. That was not the
route Busby would choose, he assured James Gibson. Success
would require prudence, patience and hard work.
On 19 February 1945, Company Sergeant-Major Instructor
Matt Busby was publicly confirmed as Manchester Uniteds
new manager. The appointment, for five years, would date
from one month after his demobilisation. His salary would be
750 per annum. And he would be manager in more than name
only.
6
Confident Start
Bullying could only bring instant
obedience, never lasting results.
Matt Busby

Matt Busby rarely acted on impulse, yet when he asked Jimmy
Murphy to join him at Old Trafford he cast aside his normal
caution. An Allied victory was certain when Busby and Murphy
met in Bari in south-east Italy. Sergeant Murphy was in charge
of a service sports recreation centre for troops whod defeated
Rommels Afrika Korps in the Western Desert. One afternoon
Matt wandered down to the sports centre. In a far corner of the
soccer pitch he saw a group of young soldiers gathered round a
figure he recognised.
Busby strolled over to the group and stood on the fringe, as
unobtrusively as he could. At this stage of the game few pro
footballers took their Army duties too seriously  the war was
over, it was time to relax  and most NCOs in Sergeant
Murphys position would have been larking about. Murphy,
however, was preaching football to his men with all the passion
of an evangelist. Jimmy saw Matt but he didnt pause; duty first,
old acquaintance afterwards.
Busby was a renowned figure by the time he encountered
Jimmy Murphy on this sweltering late summer Italian after-
noon. Matt was captain of Scotland, having won seven caps in
wartime internationals. Although he never betrayed his
feelings, Busby believed, as did most other observers, that
anti-Catholic bigotry had denied him his rightful place on
Scottish teams before the war. He wouldnt have been the first
Scottish Catholic to be discriminated against in this manner.
The great Hughie Gallacher from Bellshill had been a victim of
the Scottish FAs unstated conviction that Tims should only be
101
honoured asalast resort. Scotlands wartime record against i

England was appalling and included a record 8-0 thrashing at
Maine Road in October 1943. In such circumstances Matt
Busbys claims could no longer be ignored.
The news, that Busby was to take over as Manchester
Uniteds manager had reached Jimmy Murphy. Like everyone
else in football, Murphy sensed that the man standing listening
to him on this sports field in Bari was going places. But Jimmy
was more interested in the job of the moment than pausing to
introduce this distinguished observer, even though to do so
would have been good politics, boosting his own standing in
front of his men, by being familiar with the famous Matt Busby.
He talked zealously on. Busby was impressed by his passion,
and by his devotion to duty. These men werent footballers,
there was no profit to be gained from evangelising to them.
Most would have thought it a waste of an afternoon but not a
born teacher, someone with a vocation and an untarnished love
of the game.
When Jimmy was finished, Matt offered him a job at Old
Trafford. It wouldnt be easy, Busby explained. Old Trafford
had been bombed in 1941 and there was no prospect of playing
games there in the foreseeable future. United were heavily in
debt. Money would not be available to buy players. They would
have to work with what they found and develop young players
themselves. That would be Jimmys task. Impressed by Busbys
quiet assurance, Murphy accepted without hesitation.
Jimmy was thirty-five. Hed been a first class player with
West Brom, winning twenty-two Welsh caps. During the
summer of 39 hed been transferred to Swindon Town for
whom as it turned out he never kicked a ball. Busby and he were
acquainted only through playing against each other. Tapper
Murphy as he was called because of his fierce tackling, had been
a wing-half. With West Brom and Wales hed been on losing
sides more often than not. Yet he was always the last man
beaten. Hed hound opponents while railing against colleagues
who wanted to pack it in. Jimmy was honest and hungry.
Character was then, as now, a much parroted-buzzword in
professional soccer. Few understood what it meant, but Matt
Busby did. Of course battling to the final whistle showed
102
character. But that was only part of the story. Character could
be assessed in other ways: how you trained; how you behaved
towards kids in the dressing-room; how you lived away from the
game; whether the ruthless business of professional soccer had
drained you of generosity, corroding your spirit with cynicism.
In Jimmy Murphy Busby saw a man untainted by the hazards of
his occupation. The Welshman was decent, honest and, unlike
Busby, openly, uninhibitedly emotional.
When he chose Jimmy Murphy Matt followed his instincts.
His experience with George Kay at Liverpool also pointed him
in Jimmys direction. Busbys admiration for Kay was not
diminished by his former bosss apparent failure to contain his
emotions. George was a real grafter throughout his managerial
career, Busby reflected in his autobiography. He was often
misunderstood because he could never control his feelings
during a match. George was a familiar figure on the trainers
bench: shouting, beseeching, wringing his hands, holding his
head in apparent anguish, and making an excellent attempt to
head and kick every ballin the match. Perhaps he took his
football too seriously, but a fanatical enthusiasm for his job 
which could never be condemned  was entirely responsible for
those odd mannerisms.
Kays fanatical enthusiasm had proved compatible with
Busbys eloquent control. In Murphy Busby saw the image of
his old mentor. Time would show that Jimmy was an inspired
choice.
Murphys background was uncannily similar to Busbys.
Murphy was a Catholic from the Rhondda mining village of
Pentre. His father was an Irishman from Kilkenny who had
emigrated to find work down the coalmines in the early 1900s.
Jimmys mother was a widow with six children from her first
marriage when she met and married his father. Florence was
Welsh Chapel, William an Irish Catholic. Jimmy, their only
child, grew up a Catholic in a happy home where all his step-
brothers and sisters were Protestants.
Like Nellie Busby Jimmys mother wanted her son to be a
teacher. Football interfered with this ambition. Jimmy was a
good scholar and, in his early teens, a promising musician who
103
played the organ in Treorchy Parish Church. But he was also an
outstanding footballer, representing Wales in schoolboy inter-
nationals before West Brom arrived in Pentre to offer a career
in the professional game.
Despite his success as a player Jimmy Murphy remained a
plain man without conceit or affectation. When the business
was done he was a cheerful companion. He liked a pint of ale.
He liked to drink it in the tap-room. He smoked Sweet Afton.
Jimmy was a committed Catholic who took the Sacraments of
Confession and Holy Communion every week. His language
would make a sailor blush.
The deal as Busby outlined it was that Jimmy would run
Uniteds reserve team, and coach the youngsters on Tuesday
and Thursday nights at the clubs training ground, The Cliff in
Lower Broughton. Busby would take care of the first team on
Saturdays and both would share the day-to-day training. Busby
had no revolutionary ideas about physical conditioning. Keep-
ing fit was a simple business; for the first hour of a normal
morning players would lap the pitch, gradually increasing the
pace from a jog to three-quarter speed for a couple of laps,
ending with, perhaps, three or four flat. out gallops. This work |
would be broken with a lap of walking or slow jogging during
which players chatted among themselves.
Occasionally the lads would put on spikes for a sprinting
session. On Fridays a few laps and a few sprints would suffice.
When heavier work was required it would consist of long road
runs or a forty-five-minute session running up and down the
mounds of wild slag that surrounded the Cliff which bordered
Manchester Racecourse. Later, when Old Trafford was
restored in 1949, the severest mornings work would entail
running up and down the terraces.
Where Busby did depart from conventional wisdom was
about the availability of the ball during the week. On the
business of keeping fit he believed that the right types  the
kinds of players he proposed having at United  would look
after themselves. As far as the ball was concerned footballers
couldnt have too much of it. A popular cliche of the time in
professional football was that if they didnt see the ball during
the week players would be hungry for it on Saturday. This,
104
Busby knew, was quack psychology. Every mornings training
at his club would be climaxed by a game. He and Jimmy would
play on opposite sides. They would inject a bit of needle to
make sure the contest was keen.
The notion of a manager ina tracksuit was barely conceivable
to the professional players who began to drift back to United
after demobilisation. For Busby his presence on the training
ground was the essence of the new philosophy he intended to
bring to professional football. The club was a family, his family,
there would be no secrets, no gaps in communication, no
misunderstandings. His office door was always open, he told
the players during his first meeting with them. Not just for
football problems, for anything, however personal and
seemingly remote from the game.
His early experiences in Manchester had taught Matt that
nothing which affected a players life was irrelevant to his
performance on Saturday. Jean had had a series of miscarriages
before Sheena their first child was born which had troubled
Matt to the point where his game suffered. Nobody had given a
damn. His troubles were personal and therefore deemed to be
his own business. He knew different. If a players performance
- suffered it was football business. You were expected to
dedicate your whole life to football not just the time you spent
at the ground. The club had a duty, if for no better reason than
self-interest, to care about your person as well as your body.
Jimmy McMullen had cared for him, which really amounted to
doing Citys business for them. When Sheena was born at home
shed been a blue-baby. Only the kindness and nursing
knowledge of City goalkeeper Len Langfords wife, a neigh-
bour, had saved the childs life. Peter Hodge, Citys manager,
probably never even knew Jean was pregnant.
Matt Busby wanted to know everything. If a player had a
gambling debt, that was Manchester Uniteds problem. If
someone drank too much, or was enduring family or domestic
_ troubles of any kind Matt wanted to know. The training ground
was the place to find out about his people. Manchester Uniteds
professional footballers were people. This was one of Busbys
fundamental principles. Every experience of his life, good and
bad, now converged to form a philosophy whose aim was
105
transform the nature of a professional football club. Human
beings had weaknesses, inhibitions and individual traits. All
must be accommodated provided the basic character was
sound. Matt Busbys reference points ranged from Jimmy
Greer, to the loss of his father, his victimisation as a result of
casual callousness at Maine Road, the contrasting career-saving
kindnesses of Jimmy McMullen, Len Langford, and Phil
McCloy. He knew what it was like to be vulnerable, to have
your family life traumatised by death or alcoholism and to have
the spirit knocked out of you by incidental cruelties. A bruised
person was a diminished footballer.
In the winter of 1945, for the first time in his life, Matt Busby
was in a'position to enforce his will. Busbys understanding of
the critical link between the private individual and the public
performer, between person and professional, would serve to
distinguish his teams from those managed by others, like Stan
Cullis and Cliff Britton, who had played in the pre-war era.
Cullis and Britton had identified many of the same ills that
Busby had: the fecklessness; the conceits of the best players
which inevitably led to resentments and poor team spirit; the
lack of discipline, organisation and, frequently, basic fitness.
As Cullis and Britton understood it, the cure for professional
footballs endemic ills was discipline, rigorously imposed.
Freedoms would be abused if granted. Rules were laid down.
Britton, for example, would not tolerate drinking under any
circumstances. Everton players returning from a match in
London would have to make do with soft drinks. Busby, in
contrast, would have a couple of crates of beer in the home
team dressing-room immediately after the game.
Stan Cullis terrified his Wolves players, to considerable effect
the records show. His anger was legendary, his loud denuncia-
tions reverberating down many a football corridor, the echo of
recrimination often reaching the opposition dressing-room,
where it afforded some comfort and amusement. The Wolves
training ground was not a place to betray weakness. Men
worked as they would play: vigorously, relentlessly, the regime
designed to make Saturday afternoon a relatively tolerable
experience.
The destiny of professional football was, like any other
106
business, shaped by the formative experiences of those who
inherited power and responsibility. The new men would not
repeat the mistakes of the old men.
Busby and Cullis, who were to become the most influential
football managers in the fifteen years after the war, had
experienced contrasting fortunes as players. Cullis grew up in
Ellesmere Port, an ordinary schoolboy and youth player, who
failed even to be selected for Cheshire Boys. Hard work got him
to Wolves, where the renowned disciplinarian Major Frank
Buckley was manager. Cullis blossomed under his authori-
tarian regime. He thrived as a result of discipline and applica-
tion, the former imposed by the fearsome Major, the latter a
consequence of Stans own desperate desire to make his way in
the game. He was a centre-half, a destructive rather than
creative force, who by his early twenties was England centre-
half and captain. Discipline worked for Cullis. He fulfilled
himself as a footballer to a greater extent than Busby did,
although both careers were foreshortened by the war. When he
took over as Wolves manager, Cullis applied the Buckley
philosophy which had served his career so well.
Matt Busby had not really fulfilled himself in League
football. One FA Cup medal and a solitary peacetime game for
Scotland were scant rewards for his talent. The years at City had
been, as often as not, frustrating. Liverpool provided a
relatively obscure stage for a player of his potential. If Cullis,
the redoubtable striver, was the quintessential Englishman,
Busby, reared on the spellbinding wit and imagination of Alex
James and Hughie Gallacher, was a Scot to the core. A creative
player himself, Matt, while acknowledging that discipline and
application were fundamental virtues, knew that there was
more to football than efficiency. Beauty, the exquisite touch,
the impudent verve of the Wee Wembley Wizards, icons of the
Scottish tradition, this was what Matt Busby loved and what he
sought as a manager. Brilliance was not, he believed, a by-
. product of obedience.
Bullying, he observed, could only bring instant obedience
and never lasting results. Obedience off the field would yield
mere comformity when the stadium was packed. In essence the
Buckley/Cullis philosophy proposed that players couldnt be
107
trusted. Busbys deepest conviction about the game on the field
was that it belonged to players. They had to be trusted.
When Sergeant-Major Matt Busby was demobbed in
October 1945, he and Jean, and their children Sheena and
Sandy, moved to a semi-detached club-owned house in
Chorlton, a couple of miles from Old Trafford. Old Trafford
was then a bomb-damaged ruin, so Manchester United FC was
administered from a small office in James Gibsons Cornbrook
Cold Storage depot. Busby shared this room with Walter
Crickmer, a young assistant Les Olive, and a typist borrowed
from Gibsons business. To reach the Cliff for training on
Tuesday and Thursday evenings Busby took two bus rides, one
to Victoria Bus Station in Manchester, the second from there to
the training ground at Lower Broughton in the heart of Salford.
This journey took an hour.
When Busby took over at Manchester in October 1945,
United were in sixteenth position in the Northern League and
most of the players were still in the Forces. The first team he
fielded, against Bolton Wanderers at Maine Road, was:
Crompton, Walton, Roach, Warner, Whalley, Cockburn,
Worrall, Carey, Smith, Rowley and Wrigglesworth.
This was a makeshift side, deprived of the services of most of
the better players on Uniteds books who had yet to return from
wartime duties. The Bolton match was Johnny Careys first for
two years. Missing from this first Busby team were players who
would subsequently distinguish themselves in Uniteds colours
such as Pearson, Mitten, Morris, Chilton, and Aston. One by
one they would drift back from the Forces, but it would be the
beginning of the following season, in which the Football League
proper would resume, before Busby could field the team he
wanted. Meanwhile he assessed his situation and improvised
with team selection to such good effect that United finished his
first season in fourth position in the League North table.
When, during this transitional period, Matt reflected on the
challenge he faced he realised that the good news outweighed
the bad. Having no home ground to play on was, he felt, the
most serious disadvantage to be overcome. Uniteds empty
bank account was of lesser concern to him. Peace had fostered
optimism in the country at large, a fact that was reflected in
108
me?

football by a rapidly inflating transfer-market. Matt had
virtually no money to spend but he wasnt too bothered by that.
He knew that you couldnt buy success. He knew that Charlie
Mitten, Chilton, Stan Pearson and Johnny Morris were quality
players around whom he could build a side, and that there was
much more satisfaction working to improve players than
attempting the short-cut of paying large sums of money for
footballers moulded by others. Busby believed in himself.
During the first season in charge his confidence in his own
judgement received a couple of spectacular boosts. Henry
Cockburn and Johnny Carey were inside-forwards when Busby
arrived. Cockburn, a twenty-two-year-old Manchester lad
recruited by Louis Rocca from an outstanding local junior club,
Goslings; Carey, the Irishman, signed pre-war also by Rocca.
Cockburn and Carey could play but, as inside-forward, neither
made much impact.
Cockburn had joined United in 1944. Hed come with a big
local reputation. We played Tranmere Rovers at Maine Road
in one of Matts first matches, Henry recalls, I dont think he
liked what he saw of me as an inside-forward. The next Tuesday
he said he was going to try me at wing-half. That was it. I did
well facing the ball. Henry Cockburn did more than well.
Within weeks he was being talked of as a future England player,
which he became the following September. Cockburn stood
less than five feet five inches in height, but Busby didnt care
about that because the little fellow could tackle, was superb in
the air and, above all, could play football.
Manchester City had taken two years to discover how best to
use Matt. The imaginative redeployment of Henry Cockburn
was achieved within a fortnight. Busby wanted his team to play
football from the back, so moving forwards to defensive
positions served his abiding philosophy about how the game
should be played. He knew from his own playing days that
forwards could adapt to become good defenders. He had done
_so himself. Defending was about brain more than brawn, about
reading the game rather than lunging tackles. Good players
were good players. They could all read the game. Good players
had sound instincts. Most of the really important aspects of
defensive play were matters of judgement; what position to
109
take, when to tackle, when not; anticipation solved most of the 1
problems, muscle very few. The basic principles of football
applied throughout the field. Busby was convinced the bonus of
converting forwards to defenders was twofold; forwards were
usually more mobile than the typical defender of the immediate
post-war age who  the best excepted  tended to be employed for
purely destructive reasons. Football, as conceived by Busby, was
about creation first; destruction was a necessary second principle.
The successful conversion of Henry Cockburn from ordinary
inside-forward to international class wing-half was worth
around 12,000 to United. This was a huge sum of money at the
time, but Busby was pleased beyond monetary measure. His
conviction that knowledge of the game and imagination were
the most priceless assets a football club could possess was
substantially reinforced.
Johnny Careys problem took longer to solve. Carey was
approaching his twenty-seventh birthday. Hed been at United
almost ten years, six of them, of course, wiped out by the war.
Careys persona was infinitely more impressive than his early
performances for Busby. The man was cool, well-mannered
and intelligent, he dressed impeccably and read the more
serious newspapers, he trained hard. A devout Catholic, Carey
didnt swear or drink: Johnny was what people thought of as a
model pro. He was a leader, a natural leader, similar in many
respects to the younger Matt. Busby respected Carey and made
him captain of the side.
The problem was that this fine character was no more than a
journeyman inside-left. Charlie Mitten who played outside
Carey remembers, Johnny was a bloody terrible inside-left, he
was a bad player, slow and cumbersome. He wasnt up to it in
the First Division. Nor was this paragon of outsiders percep-
tion too popular in the dressing-room. Johnny was not one of
the lads. He was quiet and distant. When more exuberant
spirits like Mitten  with whose mum hed lodged for two years
after he arrived in England Cockburn or Johnny Aston started
messing, Careys manner would indicate disapproval. He had
short arms and long pockets; he was careful with his money, a
fault according to the dressing-room code. One mans Right
Type is another mans pain in the arse.
110
Busby knew the score. He wanted Careys poise to be the
hallmark of his team. Careys character was a plus in his
managers book, a desirable counterpoint to the inevitable
raucousness of dressing-room life.
Careys character should be seen in broader perspective than
that afforded by his dressing-room peers. In 1939 when war was
declared he could have chosen, as most Irishmen did, to return
to the safety of Dublin. Instead Johnny volunteered to fight
against Hitler for the country in which, as he pointed out, I
earn my living. Character judgements made on the basis of
dressing-room consensus can only be trusted up to a point. On
all bar match days the atmosphere is a mixture of barrack-room
and school playground. There is little tolerance for individu-
ality of a certain kind; for the fellow who doesnt join in, who
fails to conform to the group ethos, which is more often than not
based on values more appropriate to adolescence. Thus, Henry
Cockburn today remembers Careys carefulness with money,
he were tight were Johnny, rather than his war service. Johnny
Giles, who arrived at Old Trafford over a decade after Carey
left, recounts an anecdote about Busbys captain current in his
time: They say he was mean all right. He and Jack Crompton.
They used to sit at the, front of the bus on the way into town after
training in case the bus-conductor reached them first and theyd
have to pay for the other lads at the back. By such criteria men
were judged good lads or not.
Care must also be taken when assessing Careys ability as an
inside-forward. He undoubtedly needed more time around the
ball than was available in the First Division. But he was
technically good, with excellent control, and a fine passer of the
ball. In Uniteds last home game before Old Trafford was
bombed in 1941, Carey, on leave from the Army, scored a hat-
trick against Bury in League North.
Nevertheless, in the team Busby was constructing there was
no place for mere competence. What to do with Carey
continued to torment Busby for several months. His captains
fallibility also led Matt into serious conflict with his Board of
Directors. During one home game at Maine Road a board
member, Mr Harold Hardman, loudly and pointedly ques-
tioned the managers perseverance with the Irishman. How he
111
can keep picking him God only knows, Hardman remarked j
within earshot of Busby.
Busby, incensed, confronted Hardman in the gents toilet at
half-time: Never dare say anything like that to me again in
front of people, Busby warned him. Not content with this
rebuke, Busby placed an item, Interference by Directors, on
the agenda for the next board meeting. It was, Busby felt,
particularly important to confront Hardman. A small, wiry
Manchester solicitor, Hardman had played with distinction as
an amateur. He had won an Olympic Gold Medal for Great
Britain in 1908 and was at one time on Evertons books. If
Busbys position was to be undermined, Hardman was best
placed to do the job. On the other hand, if Hardman could be
faced down, other, less well informed directors, would take
note. James Gibson ensured that Busbys arguments were
listened to at the ensuing board meeting. A crucial principle
had been established.
As soon as an opportunity presented itself Busby dropped
Carey back to right-half. The move was successful. The old
solution proved even more effective when chance allowed
Busby to push his captain into the right-fullback position
towards the end of the 45/46 season. The further back Johnny
moved the better he became, Henry Cockburn confirms. He
was still slow, there was an outside-left at Huddersfield,
Metcalfe, who used to do him, but he was good.
Charlie Mitten adds, Johnny made himself a player by his
own efforts. Johnny Carey is remembered as one of the games
greatest players. He played in nine different positions for
Manchester United and captained the Rest of Europe against
Great Britain in 1948. He became the leader Busby was looking
for. Perhaps more than any other player, Carey confirmed
Busbys belief that the qualities of character and intelligence,
sensitively nurtured in the right environment, were indispens-
able to a football club. Ability on its own would never be
enough. There were other less tangible personal qualities,
other, that is, than power, pace and skill, from which the
character of a player, a team and ultimately a football club
could, indeed must, be wrought. The lessons applied to crack
the Carey problem were those of Busbys playing days.
112
a
Sh
When he took stock of his first seasons work Matt Busby had
cause for satisfaction. Two other positional adjustments had
further shaped the team which would embark on the 1946/47
season, the first full post-war League campaign. Chilton was
moved from wing-half to centre-half and Johnny Aston from
inside-forward to left-back. Jimmy Delaney was signed from
Celtic for a bargain-basement fee of 4,000 to add width and
pace to Uniteds right flank. The signing of Delaney was a
gamble. Bald-headed, an awkward mover, the Scot didnt look
the part and bore the nickname Brittle-bones because of his
proneness to injury. But time proved the sceptics wrong, and
many years and many great players later Busby could claim that
Jimmy Delaney was his most inspired acquisition in a transfer-
market he never really trusted.
On a broader front Busby felt the club was assuming the
identity he desired. Wherever he looked there were good
people: Jimmy Murphy was his own choice; others he felt
fortunate to have inherited. Louis Rocca, for example would
tackle any problem and solve most. If footballs were scarce,
Louis knew a man who'd give them a deal. The cost of training
gear was a worry? Leave it to Louis. And he was good at his
designated job as well. Louis, chief-scout, always knew where
the latest schoolboy prodigy was playing. His contacts were
spread far and wide, from Ireland  North and South  to
Scotland, Wales and all corners of England, the South
excepted.
Tom Curry and Bill Inglis were Rocca proteges hired as
trainers in 1934. Toms title was First Team Trainer, Bill looked
after the reserves. Once more the titles are inadequate to define
the contributions made by Curry and Inglis. Together they ran
the United dressing-rooms at the Cliff and Maine Road. A
football clubs soul is located in the dressing-room. The spirit
emanating from this room will touch everyone, colour every
aspect of club life. A dressing-room changes day-to-day, hour
to hour, the mood swinging from carefree to sombre depending
on all kinds of things other than results. Jealousy and resent-
ment are harboured here, alongside pride, fulfilment and hope.
Fear is also present, despair as well. Emotion is high in this
unique workshop-cum-playground. Every man will have his
113
day  good and bad  the wounds are bare for all to see, the
glittering jewel of victory or preferment visible also, incongru-
ously adjacent, reminding the losers of the fine line between
success and failure.
The nature of a dressing-room is determined by the senior
players and the men like Curry and Inglis for whom it is a home.
Tosher Curry looked and dressed like a fairly prosperous
suburban shopkeeper. He and Bill wore white coats over their
street clothes. They did everything but the job of training the
team, implicit in their titles. They bandaged wounds, rubbed
liniment on aching limbs, laid out the kit for training, and on
match days Tosher and Bill also filled the baths, made the tea
and acted as foremen overseeing the various tasks  from
cleaning the boots to scrubbing the baths  allocated to the
youngsters on the ground staff. Tosher and Bill catered for
every dressing-room need, knowing more, in many ways, about
the men they looked after than The Boss or Jimmy.
Curry was quick-witted, his wry, earthy Mancunian sense of
humour enabling him to give as good as he got in the banter
stakes. He was a droll character who wouldnt stand for any
nonsense, yet treated men like men. Tosher smoked a pipe and
had an old-fashioned pipemans unfussed approach to life.
About 10.45 each morning he would emerge from the dressing-
room to check on the lads lapping the pitch. As Tosher stood on
the sidelines, arms behind his back, the pace of the runners
would quicken, the talking about the night before would cease,
an air of purpose would descend on proceedings. He was
kidding them, they him. But only to a point. His authority was
real, the players response an acknowledgement of the respect,
born of affection, they felt for him.
Bill Inglis was gentle. A larger man than Tosher, quietly
spoken, a glint of mischief lightening his doleful features; Bill
radiated kindness. Where Curry would engage in banter, Bill
would smile knowingly to himself and get on with his work.
Tosher and Bill werent great academic trainers, Charlie
Mitten explains, but they were great fellas. We were like boys
with their fathers, they were great men, that was what
mattered.
Arthur Powell was the third character in Uniteds dressing-
114
om
room. Arthur was the youth trainer with particular responsi-
bilities for overseeing the domestic duties of the ground-staff
boys. Arthur was the rebel. He wouldnt wear his white coat
like Tosher and Big Bill. He was cranky or affected to be,
feigning irritation at all around him, particularly his white-
coated seniors. New arrivals feared Arthurs stern coun-
tenance, and his squat bull-dog appearance at the boot-room
door would cast a shadow over all therein. Old hands knew
better; Arthur was a pet behind the brusque facade. Bill would
make teasing fun of him That bathrooms a mess today; whats
happening with those young fellows, I dont know, Bill would
muse, shaking his gentle head. Arthur would bristle and waddle
off to take a worried look at his neglected patch of territory,
which would be perfectly clean, of course.
Buggers, Arthur called them. In the quiet of the afternoons
he would be in charge some days. The lads had to stay until five
oclock on the nail. Now it was Arthurs turn to tease. No, they
couldnt bloody well go if they got the work done by four-thirty.
Buggers, hed mutter to himself. Some afternoons he would
relent: Off you go, go on out of it, before I change my mind.
Other days Arthur would sit mellow in the dressing-room
reminding the young lads that hed got to stay as well.
Sometimes hed reminisce about his wartime adventures on
navy minesweepers. His football career had been destroyed by
that bloody war hed tell them. Could have had an England
cap was one of his favourite themes. Lost it for you buggers,
he would moan mock-sourly. The older players told a different
story, at least a variation which got Arthur going. Hed never
played football and had only been in the Merchant Navy. Bill
would pluck the larded game: Has he been telling fairy tales to
you young lads again? Arthur would storm off. And now he
meant it! 4
The atmosphere in Uniteds dressing-room was not devoid of
coarseness, there were the usual rows, the inevitable per-
sonality clashes, but the prevailing spirit reflected the charac-
ters of the three men who presided over all.
The fact that Uniteds dressing-room had no history meant
that Busby and his staff could influence the mood from the
beginning. The average age of the first team squad was twenty-
115
six, but, as Mitten pointed out: We were all greenhorns wall
coming out of the Forces, we were glad to have come through ;
the war, to be alive. This helped us get along together, we 
realised how lucky we were to be playing football at all.
An objective analysis of the club soon to enter the history
books as Matt Busby United must allow that he began his
managerial career in remarkably fortunate circumstances.
Almost all the assets he possessed in the summer of 1946 were
the product of work completed before he took the position of
team manager. Busby had hired Jimmy Murphy and spent
4,000 on Jimmy Delaney. The positional changes he made,
those concerning Carey and Cockburn in particular, were
inspired. But others, notably Louis Rocca, Walter Crickmer
and Jimmy Gibson had laid the foundations with painstaking
care over a period of more than a decade. Busbys wisdom was
to leave well alone. His presence itself was an asset. He was
respected throughout the game, especially in Manchester. His
philosophy about what was desirable in professional football
was compatible with that outlined in Manchester Uniteds last
pre-war AGM by Jimmy Gibson.
Gibson had spoken with pride about the MUJACs, declaring
that United had no intention of buying any more mediocrities.
His stated aspiration of, a Manchester United composed of
Manchester players, would prove a touch idealistic in the world
of professional football. Nevertheless, this ideal was closely
related to Busbys convictions about the club as family,
producing from within its own distinct environment a different
kind of professional to the ones he had grown up among.
Gibson and Busby were both radicals, offended equally by the
seamy expediency then endemic to the professional game.
Without one the other could easily have failed. Gibson needed
a professional to realise his dream, Matt Busby, needing a
patron, was bequeathed a legacy considerably richer than he
might reasonably have expected.
q
Matt Busby United
On our day we never thought
anyone could beat us.
Charlie Mitten

Pre-season training began at The Firs in Fallowfield in mid-
July. The summer of 1946 was hot. Clement Attlee was Prime
Minister of a Labour government which was going to build a
just society. Although ration-books were still around, people
felt a new age was beginning. Old values had, with Winston
Churchill, been rejected. This sense of a different order was
reflected in the Manchester United camp at Fallowfield. The
Busby regime was different, better, than any of the players had
known before.
Manchester United had been a pre-war music-hall joke. The
yo-yo, team, up and down between Division One and Two. No
manager, no wages on one still remembered occasion. By his
very presence the great Matt Busby dramatically altered the
clubs sense of its identity. His benign, track-suited presence
created a buzz on the training ground. Morale was high before a
ball was kicked in earnest. The players were back on full-time
training, all except the remarkable Henry Cockburn, who was
still working as a textile engineers fitter, and Joe Walton, a
promising young right-back who was a plumber by trade.
If Attlees was a humane, peoples government, Busbys
United was its footballing equivalent, a players club where all
were equal, pulling together in the cause of enlightenment.
Charlie Mitten recalls the liberating effect Busby and
Murphy had on their first United team: They were man-
management men. They understood their players and left them
alone. We were good players; Stan Pearson, Chilton, Jack
Rowley, Jimmy Delaney, Little Henry, Carey when he moved
117
to full-back. There wasnt a lot they could teach us, they werent
coaches in the technical sense. They made you feel good.
Henry Cockburn confirms Mittens account, with a fascinat-
ing caveat: Matt always used to say keep the ball flowing.
When Ifinished playing and went on coaching courses they had
invented one-touch and two-touch games as part of the
coaching system. It was only then I realised, hell, Matt had us
playing like that, unknowingly.
When one looks back to the Manchester United training
ground of 1946 from the bleak world of the 1990s when the
dogma of coaching has all but rid the British game of the beauty
Busby conspired with his players to create, one sees a brutal
irony in the transformation that has taken place between then
and now. Busby had lamented the absence of teaching and
guidance in his own playing days. So he put his track-suit on and
worked with his players. He was the first coach. The wisdom he
imparted was, as Cockburn illustrates, absorbed unknow-
ingly. Was there, therefore, nothing to it?
Out in Fallowfield Busby preached a simple gospel. His
revolution was founded on basic, easily understood principles.
In their five weeks of pre-season training Uniteds players saw
more of the ball than in any other five-month period of their
careers. Practice matches, three or four a week, were the
medium Busby used to convey his message. Just as the absence
of history helped foster a new spirit in the dressing-room, it
facilitated the propagation of a new footballing philosophy on
the training ground. The fact that the pupils were not young-
sters but mature pros was another bonus. Matt Busbys
credibility as a teacher was further enhanced by the fact that, as
Henry Cockburn reminds us, he was the best bloody player in
the club.
In the practice games Busby played on one side, Jimmy
Murphy on the other. There were no convoluted tactical
schemes. The message was precise: The ball is made round to
go round. Passing was the key to all doors. Give it to a red-
shirt. Time after time this simple imperative echoed across the
sun-drenched playing fields. Keep it simple, they told the
players, keep it moving. The instruction was easy to comply
with. And that was its most profound virtue.
118
Fear was the enemy. This enemy manifested itself as
intimidation in the dressing-room, as confusion on the football
field. Confidence had to be imbued on and off the field. Being
confident was feeling you belonged, being confident was feeling
you were capable of fulfilling expectations. As far as football
went, Busbys expectations were within any professionals
compass. All were psychologically reassured by their first
encounter with the Great Matt Busby.
Confidence was, he knew, a fragile yet precious commodity
in football. Most players performances in any game were
determined in the opening fifteen minutes. If you went onto the
pitch unsure of what lay in front of you the risks were all the
greater. Fear came in many forms: fear of the opposition,
induced, perhaps by an over-anxious manager; fear of being
unable to live up to the grandiose rhetoric of your managers
team talk; fear of the unknown, which frequently had as much
to do with confusion in your own ranks as anything the
opposition was likely to fling your way.
The confidence Busby and Murphy bestowed upon their
players was the certainty that they could accomplish the tasks
they were given. Busbys belief was that games couldnt be won
on the training ground or in the dressing-room, but they could
be lost in both places. Football was a players game, and any
man good enough to be a pro required nothing more than
confidence to fulfil the gifts hed been born with. Providing
confidence was his job. Manage the man and the magic would
take care of itself.
Charlie Mitten believes that neither Busby nor Murphy knew
the game ina technical sense: In terms of knowledge. . . zero.
Both of them. Jimmy had guts and he imparted that to the
players. Jimmy has yet to tell me something about football I
didnt already know. Matt was the boss, he understood players
and geed them up.
Wherever football academies have met and the subject of
- Busby and United has cropped up, the question of whether his
philosophy was wise or merely simplistic has surfaced. As
football changed from a players game to a coachs the view
prevailed  most vehemently among a group of players within
his own club  that his message was a joke or alternatively, that
119
if the speaker had the players Busby had, he would be happy to
let them just go out and play. Thus, the phrase man-
;
management became a synonym for knowing damn all, or, as
Charlie Mitten succinctly puts it, zero.
Mittens claim that there wasnt a lot they could teach us
because we were good players, prompts one to examine that
assertion in the context of the summer of 46. Charlie himself
had been at the club since 1936. Born in India, the son of a
soldier, Mitten was reared in Manchester. When war broke out
he went to volunteer for the RAF  Being a bloody stupid lad I
wanted to be a rear-gunner, wanted to fire guns and kill
Germans. He was sent to Blackpool for training. One night I
was in the Winter Gardens  war-time in Blackpool was great,
the best pubs and social life in the country  when I met Stan
Matthews who was a Sergeant in the RAF.
He said, What are you doing here. I said, Im on an air-
gunner course. He said, Are you bloody mad, they'll be
sweeping you out of the gun-turrets in bits.  Matthews told
him that the RAF were looking for footballers to be PT
instructors and promised to have a word with the Squadron
Leader.  I hear youve changed your mind Mitten.. . . Yes
sir, Ive decided Id like to live a bit longer. . . . Nothing
wrong with that Mitten, what can you do? 
Charlie travelled around Britains aerodromes organising
fitness courses for the men. Among those he served under was
Walter Winterbottom, a former United reserve player who
went on to manage England, and become the high priest of
coaching, after the war. Charlie ended up serving in the Azores
and guesting for Tranmere Rovers and Chelsea. He recalls
playing at Stamford Bridge one day during a buzz-bomb raid:
It was amazing. We were playing away and all of a sudden it
went deadly quiet. We could hear the buzz-bomb, it came
straight across the ground and we all stopped, held our breaths
and prayed that it would keep going.
When he was demobbed in 1945 Mitten returned to United to
sign professional forms. Before Busby arrived, the man, who in
hindsight believed that there was little he could be taught, had
played no League football. In the summer of 46 Charlies
experience amounted to a season in the League North. He was
120
twenty-five when he made his Football League debut proper
against Grimsby in August 1946. Matt Busby had been teaching
him, full-time, for five weeks.
The notion that Busby inherited a ready-made team doesnt
bear scrutiny. Carey, the captain, was still learning the full-back
position. Jack Crompton, the goalkeeper, was another
debutant against Grimsby having been signed from local
amateur football during the war. Cockburn was still a part-
timer, if a very special one. But Henry was a product of Busbys
imagination. The Grimsby game was also his first taste of the
real thing.
Chilton had been converted from wing-half to centre-half by
Busby. Chilton was two weeks short of his twenty-eighth
birthday when he played his second match in the First Division.
He had made his debut for United on 2 September 1939, the day
before war was declared. There can be no doubt that this dour
Geordie had much to learn from Busby and Murphy. In one of
the pre-season practice games Busby had played centre-
forward in the reserves and from there coached Chilton in the
art of central defending. This kind of tutorial was to be Matts
and Jimmys modus operandi in the years to come. No jargon,
no confusion, no loud proclamation  at least not from Busby 
rather the quiet word offering practical advice, leaving the rest
up to the player who, if he had a footballing brain, which, in
Busbys and Murphys opinion, all good players instinctively
had, would work the rest out himself.
Even the more distinguished of those who lined out for the
opening games of the 46/47 season were by no means the
finished product. Stan Pearson had played one season of First
Division football in a struggling United team before the war.
Jack Rowleys experience was similar. Jimmy Delaney was a
thirty-two-year-old Celtic cast-off. Johnny Hanlon, who played
centre-forward in the opening games, had been abrilliantly
_ promising junior. He too was making his First Division debut.
Sadly, Hanlon had been knocked around during the war and
would be forced to retire within a couple of seasons.
Manchester Uniteds circumstances must be seen in perspec-
tive. The war had in one way or another wreaked havoc with
121
most football clubs plans. Established senior players, like
Busby and Murphy themselves, were too old to resume their
careers. Many promising youngsters never had the opportunity
to learn the game and develop their talent. Uncertainty was rife
as the first full post-war season opened in August 46. This is
what encouraged those clubs who could afford to  and some
who couldnt  to plunge into the transfer-market. This option
did not exist for United. Busby was better off than some, worse
off than others. What is undeniable is that he didnt have the
players his detractors would subsequently claim he had.
Only two of the team that made a sensational start to the 46/
47 season cost transfer-fees: Delaney for 4,000 and Jack
Rowley whod cost 3,500 from Third Division Bournemouth in
1937. The rest were, as Mitten paradoxically admitted, green-
horns, certainly in terms of challenging for the Championship.
Although Liverpool managed by George Kay eventually won
the Championship, it was Manchester United who captured the
publics imagination. Almost two million people paid to watch
football at Maine Road that season. Manchester City who won
promotion from the Second Division drew their share of
Manchesters football-hungry population, but well over one
million came to worship Busbys team, playing football as it had
never been played before. The crowds flocked in droves to see
United wherever they played, home and away they attracted
the highest aggregate attendances in the First Division. During
a season that exceeded by far Busbys expectations he made two
significant changes to the side. Johnny Morris and Johnny
Aston were both local graduates of the MUJACs. Morris
returned from the war in November 1946 to make his debut,
aged twenty-two, in a 00 draw at Villa Park, and twenty-five-
year-old Johnny Aston played his first game as an inside-
forward against Chelsea in September. The following February
Busby created another international defender when he
switched Aston to left full-back, a position in which he was to
gain seventeen England caps.
Earlier that season, in September 1946, Henry Cockburn
won his first cap for England against Ireland in Belfast. The
Irish defied a Football Association edict by including four
players from the South, among them Johnny Carey. The
122
_ presence of his two recently converted pupils in the company
they kept on this occasion bears remarkable testimony to
Busbys vocation for teaching. Henry was still working part-
time as an engineers fitter in the mill. Among his England
team-mates in Belfast were some of the greatest players ever to
grace the English game: Frank Swift, George Hardwick, Billy
Wright, Neil Franklin, Stan Matthews, Raich Carter, Tommy
Lawton and Wilf Mannion. Tom Finney was a reserve. These
were incidently, the kind of players Busby didnt have at his
disposal when he set out to create his first great side.
Two days before the international, Henry Rose filed the
following revealing report for the Daily Express:

Football-golfers among the England team who play
Ireland here at Windsor Park on Saturday had a knock at
the picturesque Newcastle (Co. Down) links adjoining the
Slieve Donard Hotel where they are staying 27 miles from .
Belfast.
The club accommodated their distinguished visitors with
clubs, shoes and other paraphernalia and gave them the
courtesy of the links. But when they finished their game
they were not allowed to enter the clubhouse because of a
rule of the club which prohibits any professionals from the
privilege. Captain Burrell, the secretary of the golf club
told me: This is a private club and it has always been a rule
not to allow the use of the clubhouse to professionals. We
do not even allow our own professional to come into the
clubhouse. It is nothing unusual, being a private club we
are entitled to make any rules we see fit.

Explaining the distinction he was trying to draw, Burrell told
Rose: We have had Mr Winterbottom in and also the FA people
in charge of the party. We shall be glad to have you join us as well.
Rose does not record whether or not he accepted this invitation.
He does, however, note sardonically, For Mr Burrells infor-
mation, ex-Wing-Commander Walter Winterbottom is a paid
team manager of England. A couple of days later England beat
' Ireland 7-2. Expressing himself lost for words, Raymond
Glenndenning observed that the English team played football
such as one dreams about but rarely sees. According to
Glenndenning, Cockburn was the find of the day.
123


Busbys reputation was growing. Frank Butler of the News of
the World spoke for most, commentators and fans, when he
described what he called Matt Busby United as the finest
footballing team in the country. Busby did not court publicity
of this kind. It was, perhaps, inevitable that journalists seeking
to explain Uniteds spectacular football would seek to do so in
terms of the managers imposing personality. He was always
accessible to the press. Up to a point. He understood the value
of good public relations and used his unique charm to woo the
sportswriters. He promoted the clubs values and acknow-
ledged outstanding contributions made by his players. Again
the objective was to build confidence. But for most journalists
he remained the story.
Matt Ends a Great First Season, Tom Jackson proclaimed
in the Manchester Evening News in June 1947. Recounting how
Busby had first arrived in the city clutching a suitcase contain-
ing little more than a pair of football boots and a generous slice
of his mothers home-made cake, Jackson went on to describe
the Busby Method:
He never browbeats a player for some blatant mistake on the
field. He takes him to a quiet corner, gives him a fatherly chat
and a pat of encouragement. The player is refreshed and
unembarrassed at being shown the right way.
Alongside this tribute to Busbys first seasons work Tom
Jackson ran a story which tempered somewhat the United
managers pre-season contentment. Henry Cockburn and Joe
Walton, another gifted young United player, had both asked
for transfers after failing to agree terms with Busby. This news
created a sensation in the Manchester papers which led with the
story in banner headlines. Cockburn, left-half and Walton,
right full-back are two of the most brilliant young players in
their positions in the game, wrote Henry Rose, the doyen of
Northern sportswriters. The dispute was over money, as Rose
explained: The players have asked to be placed on the transfer
list because they are dissatisfied with the wage offered them for
next season. As they told Rose: We have told Mr Busby that
we are prepared to give up our jobs and become full-time
professionals. We were told we would not be given the
maximum wage of 12 and 10 in the summer and we think we
124
are entitled to full pay. We feel we have been given a raw deal.
Neither of us cost the club a penny. We have given our best in
every match weve played and think that this refusal to give us
top wage is poor return for our efforts.
Busby replied via Jacksons Evening News column the same
night: We have offered them reasonable terms, Busby
pleaded, but they have asked for maximum rates for next
season as full-time men. There are certain regulations about
wages to players which have to be recognised and I can state
quite categorically that Cockburn and Walton have been
offered maximum rates according to these.
The regulations Busby was invoking concerned the Ministry
of Labour National Service Act which decreed that men like
Cockburn and Walton who had been exempted from service in
the Forces would have to have their cases reviewed before
being permitted to turn full-time professionals. A separate
Football League rule insisted that they would have to play six
games as full-time pros before being placed on the maximum
wage.
Most football managers would have come to some arrange-
ment to circumvent these regulations which seemed to be, in
Cockburns case in particular, a matter of semantics. Henry
Cockburn was after all an England international and one of
Busbys great discoveries. But Busby was not an under-the-
counter man. The regulations existed and must be obeyed.
He would always refer back to the Leagues regulations,
Henry recalls. It was the Leagues decision and it had to be
obeyed. He never gave anything under-the-counter. Cockburn
was eventually satisfied by a promise that he would get what was
fairly due to him by League regulations when it was possible.
Walton proved a trifle more recalcitrant and was transferred to
Preston a few months later. Busby had, however, laid down a
marker for future reference. In his family, underhand dealings,
common currency elsewhere in professional football, were not
on.
This policy was a consequence of both his personal
philosophy and practical considerations related to football and
the needs of Manchester United. Although he kept his politics
well concealed from public view, Matt was a Labour man, as
125
indeed were most Manchester Catholics. He believed in
equality of opportunity and reward. His natural prudence
ensured that what he described to me as strong political views
remained a private matter. More practically he felt that illegal
payments in football created the very distractions within a
club that he was determined to erase. Underhand payments
invariably went to the strong at the expense of those who were
young and weak. Word of such reward inevitably leaked out
causing resentment. He'd seen it as a player and wasnt going to
sponsor illegality as a manager. Authority which lent itself to
this kind of practice conceded the moral high ground.
Authority must be fair  and seen to be.
For those reasons the rules must be observed. Another
compelling reason for not being carried away by the success of
the first full season was Uniteds financial position. Success on
the field had not provided an instant cure for debt  the club
made a profit of 10,215.15s.1d. in 1946; in 1947 this rose to
13,393.2s.1d. Alas, United had still to return to Old Trafford.
Lengthy negotiations with the War Damage Commission had
thus far yielded a sum of 17,478 in compensation for the
damage Hitlers bombs had caused to Britains finest football
stadium. The clubs persistent attempts to put pressure on the
government met with little success, despite the support of Mr
Ellis Smith MP who, although the member for Stoke-on-Trent,
was a lifelong United supporter. When United sought through
Smiths intervention to erect a stand at Old Trafford built of a
light alloy the Minister of Works refused permission. Walter
Crickmer despaired. He wrote to Ellis Smith: While we are
pleased for any small mercies received these days, I think the
big song made is out of all proportion to the very trivial licence
we are going to be granted. This was a reference to the 17,478
the club had been empowered to spend under War Damage
Commission licence.
This would be hopelessly insufficient, Crickmer pointed out,
continuing: It certainly seems to have misled everybody who
appears to have got the impression that we are coming back to
Old Trafford to a completely re-instated ground which as you
know is far removed from the truth. It is no use, Ellis, I cannot
see First League Football being staged here without a stand,
126
although driven into a corner we may have to put up with ;
anything. If so, I dread the consequences, one would have
thought in our present glory our friends at Court might have
arranged to stretch a point and allow us to do something really
substantial if only as a compliment to this great industrial
centre, whose people have certainly made a magnificent effort
in the export drive.
It was against this desperate background that Matt Busby
worked with the most admired team in the country. His
seeming meanness with Henry Cockburn was simple care with
money, shortage of which remained a continuing burden on his
club. Busbys attitude to money would continue to be in
conservative contrast to his radical approach to football on the
field. It was not in any case part of his nature to be profligate
with other peoples money. And although he regarded
Manchester United as his club, he saw his powers extending
only to matters that affected performances on the field.
Insistent on his own authority where he felt it might be usurped,
he was not inclined to intrude onto administrative ground which
was properly the responsibility of others, be they Walter
Crickmer, James Gibson or indeed the Football League and the
_ Association whose business it was to make the rules with which
he and his players would have to comply, like it or not. The
subject of money was to arise with more dramatic effect before
very long.
At the beginning of the 47/48 season Busby filled an
important gap in the clubs coaching staff by appointing Bert
Whalley to assist Jimmy Murphy with the youths and reserves.
Whalley had been on the clubs books as a player since 1934,
making only thirty-three Football League appearances in a
career blighted by the war. He was a diligent wing-half, no
more, but very popular, his pleasant disposition and sense of
humour belying his deeply held religious convictions. He was a
Methodist Lay Preacher, but not of the fire and brimstone
variety. In fact he was in no way sanctimonious, being as willing
to laugh at the jokes of which he was the occasional butt as the
dressing-room characters who cracked them. This appointment
serves to nail another myth about Matt Busbys United: that it
was a Catholic club in the sense that preferment could be
127
determined by the God one worshipped. Character rather than
religion was always the criterion, although there is much 
evidence to indicate that, fond though he was of roguish typesin 
social circumstances, when it came to the business Busby
sought to surround himself with decent, dependable men. This
he probably did associate with religious conviction, but not
necessarily Catholic convictions.
Although unyielding in financial dealings with his players,
Matt Busby never passed an opportunity to indulge them in
other ways.. The first team made regular trips to Blackpool
where they stayed at the Norbreck Hydro, the resorts best
hotel. There would be trips to the great shows at the clubs
expense and in general Busby was anxious to raise his profes-
sionals status in any legal way he could. When the star of the
show announced the presence of the Manchester United team
the house would rise to acclaim them. The happiest day of the
normal week was Monday when all the clubs professionals
were treated to a day out at Davyhulme Golf Club which,
unlike Newcastle, Co. Down, was proud to have the citys
renowned professionals in the clubhouse or anywhere they
wished to go. After training the players went to Davyhulme for
lunch, followed by a round of golf or, for those who preferred,
games of cards and billiards. An evening meal of mixed grill
would follow. Busby himself always attended. He loved his golf
and the company of footballers away from the formality of the
club. His men were in such circumstances treated like kings
rather than slaves. That applied to all his players down to the
most unlikely future star, whose name Matt would know and
make a point of mentioning lest anyone should think that a
fellows limitations as a footballer extended beyond the game to
life itself. Off-duty stars received no more consideration than
the humblest pro.
At Davyhulme Busby observed his players as human beings.
And allowed more than a glimpse of himself. We knew he liked
a bet on the horses, Charlie Mitten confides with a smile, we
could hear him phoning his bet through. Mitten was an
inveterate gambler himself. He usually had a greyhound and if
not, a tip for one. Matt was always interested in the dog  or the
tip. Johnny Aston and Henry Cockburn were, along with
128
i et
Na
Charlie, the rogues, taking the piss out of someone or other,
usually the drier members of the fraternity like Carey, Jack
Rowley, Chilton, or Jack Crompton. Better types were usually
fair game for the Lads. Jimmy Delaney was, like Stan Pearson,
amiable, willing to share the joke if not the inspiration of it. Of
all of this Busby was tolerant; he enjoyed a laugh although he
didnt swear himself, nor outwardly baulk at the use of bad
language. Only the most insensitive, however, missed the point
at which order had been breached.
On Saturdays Matt was remarkably tolerant of Mittens
habit of waiting until the result of the 2.30 race was known. On
Mondays at Davyhulme the same easy sense of his own
authority steered him through circumstances few managers
would have been able  or indeed would have wished  to
negotiate. From this camaraderie with its backdrop of benign
paternalism one player stood apart; Johnny Morris was an
independent spirit. A brilliant footballer, with excellent tech-
nique, a maker and scorer of goals, Morris, at twenty-three
the youngest of them all, was popular with the other players.
Henry Cockburn used to kid Johnny that he was a Commie,
for Morris had opinions about the game and, in the manner of
Billy Meredith, a players place in the order of things.
Paternalism was, he felt, condescension in disguise. Busbys
acute antennae picked up the signals. Their relationship was
never better than tolerable, despite Morriss superb contribu-
tion to the team.
Manchester United picked up where theyd left off in the
season 47/48. Johnny Aston had established himself at left-
back. Morris, as well as being a regular goalscorer, added a -
delightfully impudent dimension to the team. Stan Pearsons
confidence grew, and he became the man who controlled the
rhythm of games. Jack Rowley scored twice in the opening
away fixture at Middlesborough and four times a fortnight later
in a 6-2 win at Charlton. Busby had, unusually for him,
predicted that United would win the Championship before the
- season began. Boastful declarations were not his style. In the
next few months he learned a lesson he would not forget; let
your team do the talking. After losing 2-1 away toArsenal -
the eventual champions - in their fifth League game, United
129
suffered an indifferent spell during September and October
which virtually placed the title out of reach.
The loyal Manchester crowds did not desert the team that
always promised the exotic. On 8 January 1948, 81,692, the
second biggest attendance in Football League history watched a
classic exhibition of football when Arsenal visited Maine
Road. The result, a 1-1 draw, left one correspondent com-
menting the next day: I left the game disappointed. Unbiased,
as I was, I wanted this wonderful attacking machine of Matt
Busbys to score a winning goal. But they couldnt. He and
others rooting for Matt Busbys United didnt have long to wait
for their desires to be fulfilled.
United drew Aston Villa away in the third round of the FA
Cup. They were a goal down after ten seconds without a United
player touching the ball. Jack Rowley equalised in the sixth
minute, then Morris scored twice, Pearson and Delaney gave
them a 51 half-time lead. A couple of minutes into the second
half Edwards scored for Villa direct from a corner. Nine
minutes from time Villa scored from the penalty-spot to make it
5-4.
On our day we never thought anyone could beat us, Charlie
Mitten admits. At half-time they believed that this was their
day. As Villa pressed for an equaliser, roared on by 60,000 fans,
it seemed Busbys team had once again stepped the wrong side
of the line between confidence and complacency. Desperation
evaporated a minute from the end when Mitten broke through
on the left to give Stan Pearson an opportunity to score Uniteds
sixth goal.
United drew League champions Liverpool at home in the
next round, but as City also came out of the hat first Maine
Road was unavailable. Busby cheekily chose to play the tie at
Goodison Park where, within roaring distance of Anfield,
Liverpool were easily beaten 3-0. In similar circumstances,
City again having first call on Maine Road, United chose Leeds
Road, Huddersfield, to entertain Charlton in the fifth round.
The London team were comfortably seen off 20. Preston were
Uniteds quarter-final opponents and United won 41 before a
full house at Maine Road.
United were now favourites to win the FA Cup. They had
130
reached the semi-final in style, scoring fifteen goals, conceding
just five. Arsenal were clawing their way to the Championship,
but it was to Busbys daring side that a country wearying of
post-war austerity looked for verve and a dash of brilliance on
an otherwise bleak horizon. United had broken all attendance
records on the way to the semi-final where Derby County were
to be their opponents: before the Liverpool tie crowds had
formed six-deep outside Goodison Park; black marketeers had
enjoyed a field-day before the Preston game selling two-shilling
tickets for ten shillings, and even as hundreds fought
desperately to buy at this inflated price, one enterprising tout
conducted an auction during which the price for a two-shilling
ticket rose to a 1 note.
As Busby prepared his team for the semi-final word reached
the players that their opponents had been promised a bonus of
100 a man for victory. In 1948 the maximum wage had risen to
14. One hundred pounds seemed an unearthly reward. The
United players held a meeting during which Johnny Carey was
urged to approach Busby to see if the club would be prepared to
match Derbys offer. Johnny Morris was the most militant
advocate of rebellion, although most of the others felt sympa-
thetic to the argument that everybody seemed to be doing well
out of Uniteds success except the men who did most to achieve
it. Carey reluctantly delivered the message to Busby whose
response was a rare display of real anger.
Everything Matt Busby had done at Manchester United had
been aimed at fostering an ethos different to that which
prevailed elsewhere in professional soccer. Men were treated
fairly in all matters, generously to the very limits the laws
governing football permitted. The golf at Davyhulme,
Blackpool at the best hotel, the best shows. Hed arranged for
Uniteds players  all of them  to have free passes for the
leading cinemas in Manchester. They wore smart new blazers
with the clubs crest, and neat grey flannels. They had moved
forward in many ways from the cloth-cap and muffler era hed
played through. His players were respected, in order that they
would respect themselves. Hed fought with the Board to get
the money for golf, Blackpool and shows. Only the best for our
players had been a core value for him one not readily accepted
131
by all upstairs. His anger was genuine, the more deeply felt
because this demand for dirty money was conceived at the
moment when the glorious fulfilment of a Wembley Cup Final
was within reach. You couldnt buy pride or loyalty, he told
Carey, who shared his convictions. If you could there was no
point in being in the game. Football would be just another
business. The idea was repugnant to Matt Busby. Those who
promoted this idea were failing him; he felt he had failed in
some important sense to create the kind of club he wanted.
Derby County were a money club. Big spenders who'd paid
21,000 for Billy Steel and Raich Carter, their two great inside-
forwards. In the semi-final at Hillsborough Steel and Carters
counterparts in Matt Busbys team were Stan Pearson and
Johnny Morris. These two local players cost United a total of
20  two 10 signing-on fees. For Busby this was a source of
pride. For Johnny Morris a cause for disenchantment.
Neither man was wrong.
Busby refused to compromise. United beat Derby, Stan
Pearsons hat-trick ensuring their passage to the Final. The words
he uttered afterwards underline Busbys ability to inspire his
players by means other than tactics and money. All this time I was
thinking of Matt Busbys words: The greatest thrill in soccer is
playing at Wembley on Cup Final day  now Im going there.
Three men dominated the build-up to the 1948 Cup Final:
Matt Busby, Stanley Matthews and Johnny Carey. Matthews
was thirty-three, a legend, yet still to win a Cup or Champion-
ship medal. Gordon Richards, the greatest jockey of those
years, had never won a Derby. Every spring and summer the
nation would wonder if this was to be Matthewss Year or
Richardss Year. Ironically 1953 would see both these great
British sportsmen crown their careers with the most coveted
prizes their sports could offer.
Carey had been voted Footballer of the Year. The Irishman
was seen to embody the values  on and off the field  of Busby
himself: elan in battle, dignified, modest acknowledgement of
the acclaim which greeted victory. Carey was the sportswriters
choice and the peoples. Had the ballot been confined to
Uniteds dressing-room Little Henry, Stan Pearson or Johnny
Morris would have been the main contenders.
132
Busbys charismatic presence stood silhouetted above all as
the two teams took the field for this all-Lancashire Cup Final.
Immaculately dressed, striped tie, white shirt and trilby, he
strode elegantly across the perfect green turf looking more
regal than His Majesty King George VI who presided over this
great occasion. He was proud. Not for himself, but for the
things he believed in and the people he loved and belonged to.
The values which he believed had created this moment went
beyond football as it was, extending, really, to life as it should
be lived. His football club reflected what had touched him most
in his life: the camaraderie of the coalface in Old Orbiston; in
Carey the shining symbol of Catholic behaviour, as Nellie
Busby, sitting now close to the Royal Box at Wembley, had
preached it in her home; behaviour overcoming bigotry, a
means by which the despised, whether Catholics or profes-
sionals, would triumph in the end; in his team, the daring and
brilliance of Alex James and Hughie Gallacher with which Matt
had fallen in love after his father was killed in the First War;
most of all he was moved now not by the glamour of this grand
occasion but the simple thought, family: Tom Curry and Bill
Inglis, the youngest player on Uniteds books, and the ladies
from the office who made the tea. And all his pals, the bookies
and showmen, the gamblers, Jimmy Greer and the Glasgow
Empire, Jean, Sandy and Sheena, Phil McCloy, Jimmy
McMullen, Len Langford and his wife who'd saved the blue-
baby. Kindness shown by your own to your own.
He had sent his team out with the usual instructions: Give it
to ared-shirt. Keep it tight in the first fifteen minutes. Enjoy the
occasion. Charlie Mitten was delegated to drop deeper to assist
Johnny Aston in containing Matthews. Busby was confident.
Wembley was the perfect stage for the football he had inspired
his team to play. The lush turf would facilitate the passing game
and punish most those who had to chase the ball.
The afternoon was compelling, rendered so because the
unexpected happened. Blackpool went ahead fifteen minutes
into the game when Shinwell scored from the penalty-spot after
Chilton had fouled Mortensen. Rowley equalised after a
furious bout of United pressure. Five minutes later Mortensen
gave Blackpool the lead which they held until half-time.
133
Busbys composure during the interval was striking. He and
Carey insisted keep playing. After sixty-nine minutes of thrust
and counter-thrust Blackpool were still in front. Johnny
.
Morris, sharp-witted as ever, saved United just when Man-
chester hearts were sinking low. The little rebels quick free
kick allowed Jack Rowley a couple of yards of space and the
scores were level. Stan Pearson got the decisive goal eleven
minutes from the end. Johnny Anderson distorted the
afternoons events with a chance thirty-five yard punt which
made it 42. Busby had included Anderson at the expense of
the veteran Jack Warner whose legs he felt would not last the
ninety minutes on the strength-sapping Wembley sod.
Triumph over adversity was an appropriate parable of Matt
Busbys life, of the city he loved and the club whose name would
now be engraved on the FA Cup almost forty years after Billy
Meredith first placed it there.
W. Capel Kirby writing in the Empire News commented:
There may have been better Cup Finals, but certainly not
within my memory over a period of 25 years. Neither can I
remember any team winning the Cup after twice being in
arrears. For this alone Manchester United fully merited their
success. Never at any time did they depart from the pure, subtle
principles outlined by their manager, Matt Busby.
In Manchester people left their wireless sets to flock
jubilantly onto the streets. Further north in the Northumbrian
mining village of Ashington a ten-year-old boy vividly
remembers that afternoon: We played for East Northumber-
land Boys in the morning, Bobby Charlton recalls, and we
were invited to go to one of the lads houses to listen to the Cup
Final on the radio. We had no television in those days. After a
while we went out onto the street to play football  we couldnt
get enough in one day  and every so often we would come in to
ask the score. I remember United equalising. The next we
heard theyd won. They said it was the greatest Cup Final of all
time. I think it was from that day that I wanted to be a footballer
and join Manchester United.
One hundred thousand Mancunians turned out to welcome
the heroes home the following day. One eleven-year-old boy
134

3
el .
ran perilously close to the open-topped bus bearing the team
and the gleaming silver trophy. Shay Brennan never knew a
moment so dazzlingly exquisite.
Before their triumphant procession through the city to the
Town Hall in Albert Square, the team stopped at the home of
James Gibson whod been too ill to watch any of their games
that year. You have fulfilled my greatest ambition, he told
them. Only two of the side had cost transfer-fees, seven were
local lads; a Manchester United composed of Manchester
players, the team hed promised in 1939.
8
Reality
Matt was very strong on his
principles.
Paddy McGrath

With success came problems. They were various; who should
get the credit; who was hogging the glory; and what about the
spoils of victory which can be spent in the shops, money. Matt
Busbys Manchester in 1948 was no different in this respect
from the years when Billy Meredith cast the city in the mellow
light of glory. Busby and his players went off to Ireland during
the summer on a tour whose declared objective was to honour
Johnny Carey before his own people. Two games were played
in Dublin, one in Belfast. For the players this was a holiday, for
- Busby Ireland had particular meaning as the country from
which his forebears had travelled to Scotland in search of work.
He loved the South of Ireland and would return many times in
the years ahead, often, at low points in his life, taking a motor
car in Dublin and travelling alone through the countryside.
Before the television age he could travel unrecognised, have a
few drinks, which he now enjoyed, and go racing at Leopards-
town or the Phoenix Park, mixing with the trainers, jockeys and
bookies. Paddy Prendergast, the great flat-race trainer of the
time was the kind of rakish character Matt was especially fond
of. The horses or dog-racing at Shelbourne Park, easy,
gregarious company anda few jars, perhaps a game of golf,
enjoying these simple pleasures he could shed the mask of
dignity, at least the cultivated layer which marked the football
man. Billy Behan, Uniteds Irish scout, a part-time bookmaker,
was his guide on these occasions.
The post-Wembley holiday was pleasant. The games, against
a Shelbourne Select XI and Bohemians, the grand old Dublin
136
amateur club, were comfortable, a chance to show off. The
food was a real treat, eggs and steak, rare commodities in
Britain. A trip like this saw Busby at his best. Men were men
and treated accordingly. Rules about drinking were waived.
The odd peccadillo  if discreetly embarked upon  was
permissible.
Knowing their penchant for a bet the hall-porter at the Royal
Hotel in Bray, a few miles outside Dublin, approached Charlie
Mitten, the most obvious and fearless punter, with some
information: the porter knew about a dog that would win at
Shelbourne Park. He and the trainer were anxious to make sure
of victory. Substantial sums stood to be won. Was it true that
the great United team took, er, special stuff for big games?
Charlie, not wishing to disabuse his new friend and therefore be
excluded from the coup, hinted that yes, of course, there were
special embrocations and other things that boosted per-
- formances. Hed have a word with their medical men.
Ted Dalton, Uniteds physio and Tom Curry were joined in
the conspiracy. Various potions were produced, all of which
looked effective, none of which would make the slightest
difference to the dogs performance. By the appointed evening
Charlie had convinced the porter, who in turn persuaded the
trainer to deliver the greyhound to the Royal Hotel where the
magical substance  undetectable the trainer was assured 
would be administered in secret in Daltons room.
Whatever it was it smelt convincing and dog, trainer, porter
and players piled into taxis for Shelbourne. Busby and Jimmy
Murphy were enthusiastic co-conspirators. At the track they
were all on. The dog won. Despite the magic potion.
This harmless escapade provided some temporary easing of
the tensions growing between Busby and his players. Resent-
ment simmered beneath the surface. The Cup victory had
rewarded everyone except the players whod fought so heroic-
ally. Busby himself was the most renowned football man in
Britain. He was honoured to be appointed manager of the
Great Britain Olympic team for the 1948 games. In Manchester
a legend was growing around him. Johnny Carey, Footballer of
the Year, was similarly feted. A newspaper campaign had
begun to nominate him for the captaincy of the Rest of Europe
137
team due to play Great Britain in the autumn. Matt Busby
United were wanted for foreign tours, offers were on the table
from Argentina, the United States and most countries in
Europe. Yet for the men who'd done the business the financial
rewards, for breaking attendance records, finishing second in
the Championship and winning the FA Cup, were paltry. The
maximum wage was 12 a week, 10 in the summer. For
winning the FA Cup Uniteds players received the statutary 20
bonus. Blackpools players had been rumoured to be on 100 a
man. Two years previously Derby County, winners in 1946, had
given their heroes a gold watch as a present for winning.
Bending the rules was common practice within the game.
Everybody knew it.
Back in Manchester for pre-season training Busbys players
held a meeting among themselves. Summer had hardened their
mood. Carey was again asked to approach Busby to see if
something extra could be done. He refused. Even the dressing-
room moderates felt aggrieved this time, and men like Chilton,
Jack Rowley and Jimmy Delaney, who would normally have
remained neutral, spoke up in support of Morris, Mitten,
Cockburn and Aston, the awkward squad.
Their circumstances must be remembered. Most of them were
getting on, the dismal age of thirty was not too far away. They had
achieved things they might never achieve again. Now was the time
to make a stand. We were living in club-houses, Mitten explains.
Nice houses, at a normal rent of 30 bob a week. But this was from
12 10 in summer. We knew what others were getting, guys we
were playing against . . . and beating. And of course the thought
was never far from mens minds  especially those who could see
the end in sight  that the day would come when the club
demanded their house back. For the United players these
considerations were all the more pressing because they had
already lost good earning years serving their country in uniform.
Theyd paid the price for that victory, now it seemed fate was
cheating them again. Even the fucking glory wasnt fairly spread.
To the papers and the fans Matt Busby and Johnny Carey had
won the Cup. The lads had been mere extras. They were not in a
philosophical mood. Carey was shouted down. The players
insisted on seeing The Boss.
138
The Boss referred them to the Football League rules. He
had done everything he could. Morris was not the only rebel
this time. Chilton spoke up, so did Charlie Mitten. The
mood of the room was behind them. Busby sensed the scale of
the revolt. He reminded the players of the clubs generosity. . .
Blackpool, golf at Davyhulme, the National Savings certificates
they were given at Christmas, the trips to Belle Vue to see the
big fights, the outings hed instituted to Colwyn Bay and
Blackpool in the summer for them and all the other members of
the staff. The club would do anything it could. Within the rules.
Other clubs could do what they wanted, this was Manchester
United he replied when the going rates elsewhere were alluded
to.
His response was firm and unequivocal. The sullen silence
was broken, nobody remembers now by whom. Perhaps a
compromise could be reached. Instead of money or a gold
watch, a set of golf clubs would be given to each player legally
 as part of training equipment. Here was an opportunity for
Busby to quell the revolt. He declined to take it. The players
insisted that they would like to put their case to the board. If the
rules were Busbys concern the players wanted to speak to the
men who made them. The following day Harold Hardman,
acting for James Gibson who was ill, came to the dressing-room
where he reiterated the clubs position. Extra payments or gifts
were against the regulations and Manchester United wouldnt
break the rules. No, not even aset of golf clubs as a gesture of
appreciation.
Fifty-two thousand people turned up to watch United play
Derby County at Maine Road in the opening League game of
the 48/49 season. The public were not aware of the bitterness
behind the scenes. United lost 21, the result of a desultory
performance which reflected the dressing-room atmosphere.
Two days before this vital first game of the season the players
had upped the ante by threatening to strike if no concession was
made to them. Busby, dejected by now, had dropped a hint that
something might be done if an acceptable way around the
rules could be found. The loss, to Derby of all teams, big
spenders and rule-breakers, left a sour taste in Busbys mouth.
Of Uniteds performance Johnny Aston would later say, We
139
were spectators for most of the game. In truth, the row,
protracted as it had been, had drained everyones emotions.
This was a critical phase in Matt Busbys football life. His
character and that of the institution he was trying to shape now
faced a challenge as old  and definitive  as professional
football itself. Busby was in a trap from which no decent
professional football man could escape with honour. He was
where Billy Meredith, Charlie Roberts, Herbert Bloomfield
and indeed Manchester United had been before him  where all
professionals ultimately arrived, the point of Original Sin. He
had only two options: he coula comply with the regulations
governing professional football or obey the laws of natural
justice. There was no middle ground between the bigoted,
expedient Football League rule book  the Slaves Charter  by
which Busby now felt himself bound, and the values of fairness,
decency and equality he sought to foster in his football ciub, his
family. If he enforced football law he was denying his players
what was rightfully theirs. If he pursued the course of natural
justice he would tarnish himself and risk Manchester Uniteds
reputation.
It would be false to suggest that he saw the issues as clearly as
they are outlined above. Or that he felt any great conflict
between his duty and justice for his players. He was a football
manager acting in the greater good. The private man, who
might have seen the broader picture, the player as slave, as
others, like Meredith, Carter, Mannion and later Blanchflower
and Jimmy Hill did, had been formed by the times hed lived
through. He accepted authority. He may not have liked its
values but he understood its power.
There is a conventional view of Busby presented in all the
literature about him and Manchester United. In this he is the
purist philosopher, the idealist, the paternal father of
football, wise, benign, a man of great dignity and tolerance.
This depiction of Busby is not without foundation, rather it is
incomplete. Many who have been close to him, many who have
admired him and fallen under his charismatic spell, speak of
another tougher character capable of the kind of ruthlessness
with which he would soon deal with Johnny Morris, later with
Charlie Mitten and others who threatened his family.
140
Matt was very strong on his principles, his close friend
Paddy McGrath confides, adding for emphasis very. Charlie
Mitten describes him as watertight when it came to money.
Hed give you tickets alright, but when it came to money you
got what you were entitled to, not a penny more. The streak of
ruthlessness would manifest itself from time to time over the
next twenty years, occasionally to deal with great players and
friends, most notably Denis Law when he fought for money.
Within this large character there were many different,
sometimes irreconcilable traits. He kept journalists and
biographers at arms length. Busby is a private man, charm the
barricade he erects to ward off intruders.
In the summer of 1948 he was still a rookie manager learning
about power  how to use it as opposed to subverting it in order
to acquire it. He was in the process of establishing the values
which would prevail in his club. The threatened strike and
protracted hassle over Cup Final bonuses was a formative
experience. He tried charm, he offered the perks of Blackpool
and other treats, in the end he was brutally singleminded.
He didnt see the issue as being one of human rights because
he was not a dreamer like Meredith or an agitator like Morris,
he was certainly no purist philosopher nor, when it came to the
conditions of employment footballers were bound by, was he a
starry-eyed idealist.
It is important to distinguish between the football man whose
radical vision revolutionised the game on the field and the
person born in Old Orbiston in another age. The person was as
Harold Riley describes him, modest, someone of great
humility, knowing exactly what he was. Matt Busby had no
interest in power as such, nor was he engaged by abstract
notions about justice and equality. He was not in fact a
philosopher seeking to change the world. He was, though,
deeply committed to changing that part of the world around
him. The part he could control. The power he was interested in
was the power of football manager vested in him. This wasnt
power for its own sake. It was power used for a purpose, to
create the game of football on the field the way he imagined it in
his mind. If he had to be ruthless so be it. On the other hand if
he had to be obedient that was all right as well.
141
Matt had always got what he wanted by negotiating with
authority rather than by confronting the bosses. This was the
Catholic doing secret deals with the Almighty, sinning and
being forgiven, with a pragmatism that was offensive to the
more rigorous, righteous Protestant mind. Morality was not an
absolute, no more than justice or equality.
The lesson of his home was similarly compelling. He
appeared to conform to Nellies wishes but in the end he got his
way and didnt end up in America. Subtle and patient, no
confrontation necessary.
Confrontation and agitation were, like lofty rhetoric about
freedom and solidarity, anathema to Mattha Busby who
remembered the General Strike of 1926, its heady promises
evaporating to leave the miners isolated and humiliated. This
was power, naked and brutal and he had no intention of being a
victim. Everything hed seen in professional football confirmed
the formative experiences of his young life: authority was to be
respected: you ignored that imperative at your peril; to do so
was idle. Thus as Riley correctly points out, Busby always knew
exactly what he was and where he stood in the order of things.
The public man of great renown in 1948 was a politician who
had bargained for power in a cruel business, professional
football, not for fame or wealth but for the game itself, its magic
which had nourished him first in grief, when Alex Busby had
failed to return from the war, and which had continued to be the
most delightful, beautiful, innocent pleasure in his life  Jean,
Sheena and Sandy apart. Through the grime and filth of the
coalface, through the wicked sectarianism of Bellshill, through
the callous early years at Maine Road and the wasted futile
years of fighting Hitler, through life itself and people, above all
material considerations, there existed one thing which never
disappointed or failed Matt: football, played gloriously as
James and Gallacher had played it, as he himself had tried to
do.
Busby was a politician with a purpose, an ideal. There was
room in him for both characters. They were in essence the
same. The football man. The private man was genial, capable of
great tolerance and sympathy. But family apart, Jean above all,
private life was, as it is for most great public achievers, a cursory
142
affair, consuming little of import to him, a trivial pursuit and
indulgence of the genes inherited from Jimmy Greer.
When Matt Busby went to work there was always in his heart
a sliver of ice called experience. He would be as good as it was
possible to be. He was always firm in his principles, Paddy
McGrath suggests. The reality was that the precepts he now had
to enforce were not his but those which governed professional
football. The deal he brokered was on the bosses terms not his.
Alas, doing the best he could, for what he cared the most about,
Busby, unlike Meredith and other great football men before
1948 and since, contrived not to see the professional game as it
was but as he wished it to be.
Johnny Morris was a Meredith man. He saw the venality and
the absurdity of observing laws which were meaningless to
those who made them when it suited their own ends.
The Manchester United FA Cup heroes got their golf clubs in
the end. A wealthy businessman friend of Busbys presented
the clubs as a gift. This was an unsatisfactory compromise,
charity instead of due reward. Busby himself had received due
reward, a bonus of 1,750 for the Wembley victory. In October
1947 his original salary of 750 had been substantially increased
to 1,750. So for the players a bonus of 20, or one and a half
weeks wages; for The Boss a years salary.
United recovered from their first game defeat to establish
themselves among the leaders during the first three months of
the 48/49 season. There were disappointments; a 43 defeat at
home to Blackpool and a vital 32 loss to Wolves at Molineux.
Morris was as usual a serious contributor, scoring six goals and
generally providing for others, but his uneasy relationship with
Busby endured. On Tuesday mornings in the practice matches
he never missed an opportunity to dig hard at Busby or Jimmy
Murphy. They wanted it serious they could fucking have it
serious. As well as being a goalscorer and dribbler Morris was a
tough little bugger able to put himself about. I never met
anyone harder, Jimmy Murphy would say and he would know.
~ One morning Johnny used his skill to taunt The Boss. United
had conceded a goal the previous Saturday to a free-kick just
outside the box. A remedy was sought in training, a five-man
wall to protect the goal. After much experimentation the
143
composition and placement of the wall was agreed to every-
ones satisfaction, Busbys in particular. But Morris demurred.
There was still a possibility of scoring, he insisted. Irritated, yet
again, The Boss invited Johnny to try to prove his point. The
odds were stacked against Morris. It is notoriously difficult,
virtually impossible, to score cold like this when everyone
knows whats coming. Surprise and disguise are the weapons
you need to score from free-kicks like this in match situations.
Against your mates on the training ground, forget it. Busby was
on a winner until the ball dipped wickedly over the wall into
the back of the net. The laughter was not suppressed. Authority
was not amused.
Morris was injured shortly afterwards, missing a couple of
games. Ronnie Burke took his place and did well, scoring a
couple of goals which ensured revenge in the return fixture with
Derby County at the Baseball Ground, and one each in the vital
Christmas victories over Liverpool and Arsenal.
When Morris was fit Busby didnt put him straight back in the
side. The brooding rebel now had a cause. The row took place
in front of the other players at the Cliff. Morris wasnt putting it
in in training. Busby pulled him. Whats the point in training for
reserve games Morris responded when Busby confronted him.
With that he made towards the dressing-room. Authority
couldnt allow this challenge to pass. If you walk off this pitch
you'll never kick a ball for this club again. Busbys words
echoed around the quiet ground. Morris cast a dismissive look
over his shoulder and continued on his way.
After training, Busby went to his office and called the Press
Association with the sensational news that Johnny Morris,
Wembley hero, was available for transfer. Morris first learned
of his fate when the journalists contacted him.
This was a watershed in Busbys managerial career, the
moment when he  and those who belonged to his family 
discovered the boundaries of tolerance, the point beyond which
even the most gifted dare not tread. Johnny Morris was
expendable  despite being the most valuable player in the club.
Aged twenty-four he was younger than the others by a
considerable distance. Some of the others in the Cup-winning
team were approaching, if not at, the veteran stage. Morris and
144
Henry Cockburn were ones for the future. In eighty-three
games Morris had scored a remarkable thirty-two goals  and
made more again. He was Busbys type of player. But not his
type of man.
Busby could never fathom Johnny Morris, he subsequently
confided to an early biographer: Ive tried every angle. Ive
bullied, Ive used flattery. Ive tried every way, but I just cant
get through.
One could argue that far from being unable to fathom
Morris, Busby understood him perfectly. Morris was a talented
man, intelligent, of independent disposition, who possessed
convictions about his rights and the true nature of professional
football which were correct and not amenable to flattery or
bullying, to paternalism or authoritarianism. Johnny Morris
might be most fairly described as an uncomfortable reminder of
the nature of the deal Busby had entered into with authority. It
could be said that rebellion was the only honourable response
to slavery, but, that was not the way Matt Busby saw things.
Dissent was a threat to his club. Matt had heard rumours of
illegal approaches to Morris and Busby had learned of secret
negotiations in which all kinds of bribes were dangled in front of
Morris. There was intense speculation about where Morris
would go and for how much. Derby County were favourites to
sign him. Matt was told that Derby had offered Johnny a
tobacconists shop to sign, Paddy McGrath reveals. Matt had
him in and warned him that he didnt want Johnny coming to
the club about these offers. Dont upset my players, Matt
told him. I dont want Jack Rowley and Charlie Mitten and the
other lads unsettled by this kind of talk. Matt told him he
wouldnt inform the League about what hed found out
provided Johnny kept his mouth shut. If he fuelled discontent
at United, Morris was warned, Ill have you before the
League.
In March 1949 Johnny Morris signed for Derby County for a
world record fee of 24,000. United were due to play Wolves in
the FA Cup semi-final a few days later. The game with Wolves
ended in a 11 draw, Wolves winning the replay 10. There is
little doubt that Johnny Morris would have made the difference
between Wembley and defeat. Busby had willingly paid a high
145
price for the principles upon which he was determined to build
Manchester United.
Johnny Morris played 336 more League and Cup games for
Derby and Leicester City, scoring seventy-seven goals. His
replacement, Johnny Downie, was a twenty-three-year-old
Scot from Lanark bought for 16,500 from Bradford Park
Avenue. This was Busbys most expensive signing at the time
but Downie enjoyed four good seasons at United and played a
prominent part in the Championship-winning season of 1951/
52.
Rigorous about illegal payments, Busby was scrupulously
fair about money players were entitled to. When Johnny Aston
roomed with Tom Finney on an England trip he learned that
Preston counted time spent on the clubs books as an amateur
before the war in calculating when five-year benefit payments
were due. Thus, Aston discovered that although he had been a
pro for only four post-war years he was now entitled to his
benefit under Football League regulations. Back at United
Aston went to see Busby, who told him he was wrong. Aston
explained about Finney and Preston, so Busby checked with
club secretary Walter Crickmer and discovered that Johnny was
correct and promptly back-dated benefits due to eight first team
players.
Manchester United finished second in the Championship for
the third year running in 1949 and their semi-final exit to
Wolves in the FA Cup heightened Busbys frustration. For all
their style they were just short of Championship quality and this
team was not getting any younger. History proves that what
would be remembered as the  48 Team had in fact reached its
glorious peak that day at Wembley. Now they seemed to be
wearying and no obvious solution was to hand.
By 1949 Busby knew they would not improve. The conven-
tional wisdom suggests that he was sanguine about this, secure
in the knowledge that the youth policy was working, with a
number of extremely gifted young players on stream waiting to
burst into the first team. This is far from the truth. Indeed as the
expensive acquisition of Johnny Downie in 1949 indicates, the
first four years of the Busby/Murphy regime yielded nothing in
the way of home-bred players. After winning the Central
146
League in 1948 Jimmy Murphy had confessed to Busby that not
a single player in the reserve side was good enough for the first
team. So behind the frustration of the near misses in FA Cup
and Championship in 48/49 lay the worry about the future.
Louis Rocca, who had been there from the Newton Heath
days was also slowing down. He had served United magnifi-
cently in many roles, chiefly that of contact-man, and in essence
the *48 Team was his final legacy to the club. The following
year, 1950, Rocca died, his legend, if not the nature of his
contribution, secure. Matts first great team had been built with
men Rocca had found, the fruit of native cunning rather than
football wisdom.
Seeking someone to replace Rocca, Busby turned to Joe
Armstrong, a fifty-four-year-old GPO engineer who had been
scouting for Manchester City. As in Roccas case, a myth which
spoke of his unique eye for talent would envelop Joe
Armstrong. As with Rocca, the reality of the great scout 
which both men undoubtedly were  is in Joe Armstrongs case
more intriguing than the mythology. Joe was a more conven-
tional character than Louis. But he possessed the same
emollient skills, coming from the same Manchester Catholic
background as his predecessor. A tiny man, his thatch of grey
hair crowning a mischievous laughter-lined face, Joe was a
charmer. He was a delightful man with a shrewd mind and an
instinctive grasp of the human condition, a man of his caste and
his city. Whatever Joe knew about football he knew more about
people, working-class folk, men and especially mothers. The
appointment of Joe Armstrong was as vital as any Matt Busby
made in his managerial career.
Once more an understanding of people proved to be of as
much importance as knowing the game. As a consequence of
the dearth of good young players at United Busby resolved in
the summer of 49 to intensify the search for gifted schoolboys.
The club had made a handsome 50,000 profit that year but the
money would not be invested in instant solutions to the
_ problems Busby knew awaited him. He was encouraged to take
the longer view by the three-year contract United awarded him
in March 1949. His salary of 3,250 was enormous at that time,
five times the maximum his players could earn, four times his
147

rt
original salary. Nevertheless few managers, if any, finding
themselves in Busbys circumstances would have had the
courage to eschew the transfer-market option.
Joe Armstrongs instructions were to get the best, which
meant keeping a close eye on representative schoolboy football
at international and Schools Trophy level. Talk of scouring the
parks and making divine judgements based on a mystical gift for
spotting talent  the stuff of scouting mythology and the Rocca
and Armstrong legends  is nonsense. Everybody knew who the
most gifted youngsters were and where they were. Of course
judgement had to be exercised but that took place later in the
process when youngsters had arrived at the club to be tested by
Jimmy Murphy and Bert Whalley. They were the football men,
Joe was the procurer. Charm was Joes great weapon. Mothers
were the target. Other clubs offered money, Joe provided
reassurance. Women liked him. He was kindly yet flirtatious in
a comforting way. He was the type of man you'd feel would look
after your lad as a lad as well as a footballer. Mothers didnt
understand professional football and were apt to be apprehen-
sive about big city life with all its temptations. Joe understood
their fears only too well. That was always his opening pitch. The
box of chocolates and the bunch of flowers invariably followed,
not on the first visit to the house, and not in an obvious way, but
when the time was right for the intimacy implicit in the gift. The
more cynical families might rebuff the flowers and chocolates
routine, but this was OK. Manchester United didnt want a
certain type, they wanted the Right Type.
As Billy Behan emphasises: They would always ask about
the family, what was the father like, what sort of people were
they. It didnt matter how good the boy was if the other things
were wrong.
If the family was religious Joe would add a Miraculous Medal
hed brought specially from Rome to the other gifts he bore.
The medal would be for real, as were the other kindnesses.
Fathers were handled differently, more man to man over a
pint of ale in the taproom if that suited. Men, knowing more
about football, were impressed by Uniteds style, even more by
Matt Busbys renowned character and most of all by Uniteds
policy of giving youth a chance.
148
The Armstrong approach worked in many ways, not the least
of them being that the greedy, cynical and insensitive would be
weeded out at the wooing stage.
All of this remained a hypothesis before Joe hit the road in
the summer of 49. Of the great team that would emerge from.
this unique system only four youngsters were on Uniteds books
when, on 24 August, the club returned to Old Trafford for their
opening home game of the season against Bolton. United won
3-0, Charlie Mitten striking the first goal scored at the ground
for eight years. Among the 41,000 watching were four young
men, Roger Byrne, Jack Blanchflower, Mark Jones and Jeff
Whitefoot.
The 49/'50 season was a disappointment in the end.
Manchester United finished fourth in the First Division and lost
2-0 away to Chelsea in the sixth round of the FA Cup. This was
disappointing only by the standards Matt Busby had set and the
expectations of Uniteds supporters and those in the game in
general. Busby was particularly troubled by the sides poor
finish to the season. After beating Middlesborough 3-2 at
Ayresome Park on 11 March United went eight games without
a win before ending the season at Old Trafford as theyd begun
with a 30 victory over Fulham. During that bleak series of .
games they lost at home to Birmingham, Blackpool and
champions-elect Portsmouth.
His established players had all performed well, but not well
enough. Charlie Mitten had been the outstanding player of the
season. Ever present, Charlie scored sixteen League goals from
outside-left, four of them coming in a 7-0 rout of Aston Villa at
Old Trafford early in March. He didnt score again that season,
a lean spell which coincided with Stan Pearsons. But for a
winger sixteen goals was a splendid years work.
The most obvious weakness in Busbys side was goalkeeper
Jack Crompton. Aware of this Busby had signed an eighteen-
year-old from Darlington for a modest 6,000. Ray Wood was
for the future. In the summer of 1950 Reg Allen was purchased
' from OPR.
An uncomfortable degree of uncertainty about Uniteds
prospects in the new decade notwithstanding, Matt Busby had
much to be contented with in his fortieth year. He was among
149
the most respected men ever of his caste, but in more practical
terms he wielded more influence within his club than any
professional ever had. To all he was The Boss, and in general
this title was a reflection of the respect he commanded. Respect
rather than fear characterised the relationship between him and
his players. They thought him shrewd and tough. On money he
was unyielding, in other matters he was sympathetic. This was _
especially appreciated in matters directly related to football.
He was patient if you were having a bad time, forgiving if you
made a mistake which cost a game. He never demanded the
impossible, there was no ranting and raving. Uniteds dressing-
room was a refuge unlike many others which resembled nut-
houses with all the violent mood-swings of a psychiatric ward.
For United the enemy was outside which made a change from
other clubs where he was known as the manager.
Busbys relationship with his Board was excellent, the real
source of his unprecedented influence as manager. The radical
change he had sought to achieve in the managers status was
realised, and when James Gibson was terminally ill, Busby was
an assiduous visitor to his chairman. They had had their early
troubles, but these were now long forgotten. The decisive
confrontation had taken place soon after Busby arrived when
the clubs office was still on Gibsons business premises at
Cornbrook Cold Storage. The possibilities for a meddling
director were too tempting, and Gibson succumbed once too
often to suggest that United needed to buy a player he fancied.
He had after all secured Jack Rowley. Busbys account of this
affair does not quite ring true. In the books Matt claims to have
rebuffed James Gibson by telling him in no uncertain terms that
he was the manager and that hed survived before joining .
Manchester United and if necessary would survive without the
club. The chairman is said to have left the room angrily. Fifteen
tense minutes later he returned to apologise and assure Matt
that there would be no more interference.
Today Matt smiles and shrugs his shoulders when asked
about this scene from another life. It was not his style. But there
is no doubt that, like Harold Hardman, James Gibson got the
signals right even if they werent conveyed so bluntly. Matt was
far too subtle a man to issue ultimatums of that kind. |
150
In 1950 Gibson was his greatest admirer and protector.
Busby had delivered his dream precisely as ordered. Now this
fine man, who had in his own way done as much as Busby to
restore old glories to United, was chiefly concerned that in his
absence nobody else was creating problems for The Boss.
When Gibson asked, Is anyone interfering, Mr Busby? he had
his putative successor, Harold Hardman, foremost in his mind.
Busby assured him that he was OK.
Life outside football fulfilled the part of Busby not consumed
by the game. His salary was huge by contemporary standards.
Yet he remained a man of modest tastes. He liked to drive a
top-of-the-range car and dressed immaculately as always with
some distinctive style. He was in this personal regard image-
conscious  not for vanity, but rather as a reminder that he was
no slave.
His most profound pleasure was in his family  his real family
 Jean, Sheena and Sandy. They were very close. The man who
came home was unaffected by his public life. On Fridays, at
lunchtime, Matt would stop at the fish and chip shop for the
family meal. The Busbys lived in the same modest semi in
Chorlton. To their neighbours they were lovely people, this
feeling was reciprocated.
Social life took place at weekends. Jean and Matt liked to go
out for dinner, usually with a couple of friends  Paddy
McGrath and wife Jean, Johnny Foy, a bookmaker and, like
McGrath, a Manchester-Irish Catholic, or Eric Richardson
who was in the carpet trade. They went to restaurants in the
pretty Cheshire villages a fifteen minute drive from town. Steak
Houses were beginning to open up although they were still
beyond the reach of the population at large.
Jock Dodds, a famous, recently retired Scottish international
introduced Matt to Paddy McGrath and their life-long friend-.
ship began in Blackpool immediately after the war. Matt had
just taken over United, Paddy explains. Jock introduced us in
the Savoy restaurant in Blackpool. Dodds and McGrath were
dining when Busby walked in. Theres Matt, hes a good lad,
Dodds told McGrath, whom he knew to bea great United fan.
Would you like to meet him? Busby and McGrath hit it off
straight away. They had much in common.
151
McGrath, a Collyhurst lad with an Irish Catholic back-
ground, moved to Blackpool in 1939. Hed once earned aliving
as a prizefighter in the fairground boxing booth. He worked on
distribution for the Daily Mirror, then when war broke out used
his experience as a pro boxer to get the relatively cushy number
of PTI with the RAF. Based in Blackpool, Paddy embarked on
what he describes as a varied career. Fighting Germans was
the least of Blackpools concerns between 39 and 45.
Paddy mixed his duties for the Daily Mirror and the RAF
with some commercial activity of his own. I started an ice-
cream business. Then I sold it and went into candy floss and
rock. Blackpool was at its peak during the war. Those were
great years, youve no idea what the war was like here. Apart
from the fellas in Burma and elsewhere who were suffering, if
you were home on leave every pub was like New Years Eve
because everyone thought Im not stopping in. There was no
television, only a few wirelesses and there were so many girls
whose husbands were away. Its only natural. Its physical. And
a lot of girls who wanted to remain faithful nobody would take
them out. After two or three dates they would be dropped. Soa
lot of women had to go crooked.
There was so much life. There wasnt a bomb in Blackpool
all through the war. All the scum, all the prostitutes, all the
villains came to Blackpool. There were 80,000 airmen there.
You could double that with Yanks. There was a lot of anti-
American feeling of course because they had more of every-
thing. I often said to English people, How can you get on with
the Irish or anybody else when you cant get on with your
allies? They used to say about the Yanks, over-paid, over-
sexed and over-here. The girls were very loose, they loved
them.
Everything was in short supply  well most things  so this
vast playground needed servicing. Paddy played his part. He
didnt belong to the twilight world of the Blackpool night, but
he knew the boys who ran the place. A big, handsome, Irish
rogue, he clung to the Busby-style notion of respectability. He
remained a Catholic boy, conscious of his roots and faith yet
possessing the subtlety of mind to reconcile worldliness with the
religious convictions he espoused.
152
The young McGrath was a bit of a scrapper. We were at
Belle Vue at the boxing one night with our wives, Paddy
recalls. There was a disputed decision and I was on my feet
screaming at the ref. A few Scottish tearaways, Prods, spotted
me and Matt. They started having a go at Matt, You papish
bastard Busby, that sort of thing. I was going to have em 
they wouldnt have done it in Blackpool cause theyd have
known the score with me  anyway Matt got hold of me and
calmed me down. I always listened to him. He had that thing,
that air of authority. He woudnt shout but you took notice.
Matt and Paddy on the town, two handsome guys, smartly
dressed, cut a dash. And they did venture out to play. Prudent
Matt was, a prude he was not. Matt enjoyed the company of
self-made men, the better if they were amusing, a touch
extravagant by nature, untainted by pretention. Wherever they
went on these outings he was greeted reverently. Restaurants
would hush as he walked in, handsome, large, impressive.
The Irish writer John McGahern recalls seeing Matt in the
old Russell Hotel in Dublin at this time. The Russell was small
but grand, nestling on the corner of St Stephens Green, the
citys most fashionable Georgian square. Here the young
Charles Haughey and other dashing blades cavorted in the
post-war years. McGahern knew nothing of football and
Manchester United. This incredibly imposing man walked in
off the street. He was an extraordinary presence, like a great
politician or theatrical figure. Who is that we all wondered.
Forty years later the writers memory of Mattha from Old
Orbiston remains vivid.
On Sundays Matt would take Jean to Manchesters Opera
House, where Tommy Appleby, the manager, was another pal,
and the Busbys would sit in the best seats as his guests.
Afterwards, backstage, they would meet the stars. Jean
enjoyed this more than Matt. She, more extrovert than he, was
fascinated by the glamour of such evenings.
When business took Matt and the team away Jean would
- often take the players wives for a night on the town. She was as
much a womans woman as Matt was essentially a mans man.
She gossiped and laughed, enquired about families, kids at
school, teenage traumas and other ordinary preoccupations.
153
For Jean as much as Matt Manchester United was infinitely
more than a football club chasing medals and glory. It was
family. The most rewarding moments were not those of public
acclaim  pleasing though that was  but the more intimate,
personal times, when troubles were shared as often as
triumphs, lives intermingling, a sense of togetherness and
community offering the kind of emotional security, the feeling
of belonging, which had not always been there in her life or
Matts.
Gambling was Matts one vice. He was a keen dog man and
would visit the tracks with Eric Richardson whenever the mood
took him. This indulgence he could well afford although he
gambled, like all the inveterates, until it hurt. Apart from that
there was little pain in a private life that promised much the year
he was forty.
ay

9
Unlikely Champions
I admit we do not appear to be as
good as we were  but we are not as
bad either.
Matt Busby

In the summer of 1950 Manchester United went to the United
States to play a series of games there and across the border in
Canada. It was the trip of a lifetime. They travelled tourist-class
on the Queen Mary from Southampton. The tour was a great
public relations success. Football was enjoying one of its
periodic booms in North America and the Great Manchester
United were feted everywhere they went. The fun began on the
Queen Mary on the Atlantic crossing. The smart, handsome
footballers caused a frisson of excitement  especially among
the ladies  in the bars, restaurant and the ballroom of the
Queen Mary. The ship afforded them undreamed of luxuries
which could be savoured without dread of the forbidding
routine of daily life on the training ground. They cut a dash
enjoying the fun, the dancing and romancing, knowing they
' wouldnt have to pay for it the next morning.
Soon after they docked in New York, though, the glamour
began to pale. Results were poor, the travelling, mostly by
train, soon wore them out. In a ghosted column he was filing for
the Manchester Chronicle, captain Johnny Carey wrote of the
wonder of it all. His report was headlined:

JOHNNY CAREY WRITES A LETTER FROM HOLLYWOOD
Weve all had an experience we shall never forget: A visit
to the M. G. M. film studios in Hollywood and talks with the
stars.
How wonderful this was to us, accustomed as we are to
having the spot-light focused on ourselves so frequently!
155
We made our way through the huge gates and directly into .
the restaurant, where we were accommodated at two long
tables laid ready for us.
The restaurant was just like any other restaurant  except
that our fellow-diners were celebrated people. We hardly
ate anything, so engrossed were we all in spotting the stars.
We saw Arlene Dahl and Evelyn Keyes having lunch
together, and in the corner was George Murphy, well
known to film lovers for his musicals.
Clark Gable came striding in and hung his Stetson on top
of my cap!
Ladies, may Itell you that he looks as handsome off the
screen as On it: and I dont say that because he was
courteous enough to come over to our tables and bid us
welcome to M. G. M. and hope we would have a good time
in Hollywood.

Reality was less enchanting. The players were allowed five
dollars a day spending money. But, because North American
hotels didnt include meals in their tariff this money was literally
eaten away. This consumers paradise was no place to be
without money. The atmosphere of uninhibited materialism
exacerbated the mood of disenchantment among the heroes
with empty pockets. The arduous trips across this vast continent
added to their annoyance. They were playing to big crowds,
everyone was very nice, but they were having to scrimp and
save to eat.
When The Boss was approached he was unsympathetic.
Weren't they lucky to be here at all? Rules were rules.
One evening in New York, where United were staying at the
Times Square Hotel, Charlie Mitten received a phone call from
Neil Franklin, Stoke Citys England centre-half. Franklin had
been approached by an agent for Sante Fe FC in Bogota,
Colombia. The Colombians were offering unbelievable money
if players were prepared to go to Bogota.
How much? Charlie asked.
The first newspaper accounts suggested the offer was 2,500 a
year and 40 a week.
Mitten claims it was more: Neil said they were offering five
grand to sign on and guaranteeing another five grand a year, 40
a week, plus 35 for a win and 17 for a draw. We were on about
156
750 per year including bonuses. SoI said, sounds alright to me.
We had finished the tour so I went to Matt and said Im going
now. Good luck, Boss. He said, Oh no youre not, youve got
a contract. 
I reminded him that my contract had expired. You didnt
sign me on a new contract so Im a free agent, I told him.
This was true. Players contracts were a formality in the
English game. Technically a player was free once his contract
expired, but in reality the only option to renewing his contract
was to find employment outside the game. The club could
decide not to re-engage the player, who was bound as surely as
any serf. In the event of dispute the club could retain a players
registration  his licence to work  indefinitely in return for a
nominal wage on the lowest scale of a few hundred pounds a
year. The agreement which governed a professionals working
life could hardly be described as a contract.
Matt Busbys first reaction to the devastating news of
Mittens defection reflects the smug disregard for professionals
rights prevalent at the time. The Slaves Charter applied
worldwide wherever the games international governing body
FIFAs writ ran. What Busby didnt initially grasp was that
Colombia was not a member of FIFA and therefore Mitten was
free to go. Charlie would not be joining the line of United
players trooping into Walter Crickmers office to sign on again
when pre-season training began the following month.
Matt was shattered. This was a crippling blow. Charlie
Mitten was one of Uniteds best players. He had played 113
consecutive games for United, scored sixty-one goals in 161
appearances at outside-left, and was reckoned to be the best
uncapped winger in England. At twenty-nine Charlie was at his
peak, he was irreplaceable. Worse, unlike Johnny Morris, Matt
liked the stocky, effervescent little character who was now
blithely saying goodbye. Charlie was good for morale on grey
mornings on the training ground when the banter, for which he
had a gift, kept spirits high. You could measure Charlie's
- contribution on Saturday afternoon in terms of the goals he
scored and created, but his personality was an intangible asset
to the family, beyond price. ;
The news caused a sensation when it broke. Neil Franklin
157
was Englands centre-half. As well as Charlie and Franklin,
George Mountfield, also from Stoke, and Evertons Billy
Higgins had accepted contracts with Sante Fe. And there were
rumours that others might join them. Busbys anger grew when
he learned that Henry Cockburn and Johnny Aston had also
been approached. When he challenged Charlies two pals they
admitted that an offer had been made. The return journey on
the Queen Mary was sombre. .
Meanwhile, Charlie was in Bogota. I went down and had a
look and it was a nice place. I had a training session, played a
match which was a sort of trial, signed-on and got the readies. It
was fabulous. We had a marvellous house, a maid and a
chauffeur.
A few weeks previously Johnny Carey had dismissed the
Colombian gold in a piece filed for the Evening Chronicle.
Under the headline 3,500 A YEAR DOES NOT TEMPT US Carey
wrote disdainfully: The Millionairos Club of Colombia are
looking for players to go there. Ive had a phone call at my hotel
saying that a representative of theirs will be contacting me and
some of the other United players. The salary he is said to be
offering is 3,500 per year.
We have not seen him yet and you can take it from me, that
none of the United players would consider such a proposition
because it would mean finis as regards our future in Britain.
Charlie Mitten had demonstrated how misguided this analy-
sis was. As the United party headed for Southampton there
seemed every prospect that Cockburn and Aston would follow
their mate. They were considering the proposition. The offer,
like Careys apparently smug disregard for it, must be seen in
the context of the times. The signing-on fee plus the first years
salary was equivalent to a lifetimes earnings in Britain. The
term professional meant you played the game for money. So
why accept 750 a year when you could earn ten times as much
elsewhere. The maid and chauffeur were mere symbols of
respect for the craft you had mastered. Careys attitude testified
to the extraordinary psychological confidence trick the Masters
had played on their Slaves. To even contemplate liberty was
dishonourable. You belonged with your club in the English
game. This was natural. The idea that, like other professionals,
158
be they carpenters, entertainers or the very businessman who
was reminding you of your duty, you should work for the best
money available was treacherous, and treachery would not be
forgiven.
An astonishing example of the values which copperfastened
this system is revealed by Tom Finney, one of the greatest
English players of all time. Finney spent his whole career at
Preston North End. In 1952 after England had drawn 1-1 with
Italy in Florence, Finney was approached by the president of
the Sicilian club, Palermo. He was offered 10,000 to sign for
the Italian club, wages of 130 per month, huge bonuses, a villa
on the Mediterranean and a car. Preston were paying him 14 a
week, 12 in the summer, 2 for a win and 1 for a draw.
Finney was tempted by Palermos offer. When he got back to
Preston he sought an interview with Nat Buck, the local builder
who was club Chairman at the time. Buck was incensed at
Finneys nerve. Alluding to his great players local renown, the
chairman said without blinking, Whats 10,000 quid to thee
Tom? Nay lad, thall play for us or thall play for nobody!
The great players were treated like dirt. The Football
Association rule on travelling to and from international
matches at this time offers another damning illustration of the
status of the games greatest players. When playing for their
country, players were obliged to travel in the same class on
trains as they did when playing for their clubs. Only Arsenal
travelled first class. Thus, after helping England beat Scotland
at Hampden Park one year, Wilf Mannion of Middlesborough
had to stand in the corridor throughout his wearying journey
home.
It is, in retrospect, tempting to scorn men like Carey, Finney
and Stan Matthews for conforming to the whims of the
merchant class who governed the national game. But they
were, like Matt Busby, men of their time, with the mores of a
class-ridden culture ingrained in their souls.
When rumours of the Colombian approaches first surfaced
' early on the North American tour Matt Busby had been
unconcerned. Henry Rose filed a report from Toronto for the
Daily Express which was as emphatic as it was to prove
inaccurate: The touring Manchester United lost their first
159
match here last night by 4-2 to an FA XI, but they are not
losing Mitten and Cockburn to gold-paved Bogota. Nimble-
footed Charlie and midget Henry turned down feelers by
Franklins club. Please yourself, they were told by Matt
Busby. Both are glad to be soon going home and prefer to stay
there.
Busby had certainly not told his players to please themselves,
for he knew that the loss of Mitten, Cockburn and Aston would
destroy his team. That was the prospect as the Queen Mary
arrived in Southampton.
Johnny Aston was the first to relent and declare his loyalty to
United. Cockburn told Alf Clarke that he was giving the
Bogotd offer serious consideration. Finally Busby persuaded
Henry, but it was a close shave. Using the press adroitly to
affect indifference, Busby kept his nerve in public while
privately deploying the force of his unique personality to the
full. The problem of replacing Mitten remained. Newspaper
speculation linked United with Wolvess international winger
Johnny Hancocks, whose fee, an estimated 20,000, would
consume a substantial proportion of the 35,000 profit the club
made in 1950. Busbys distaste for the transfer-market, allied to
his belief in his own power to improvise and motivate sent him
instead to Bolton where he bought Harry McShane, a thirty-
year-old veteran journeyman, for a song. Harry, father of actor
Ian McShane, had grown upa stones throw from the Busbys
cottage in Old Orbiston, and Matt and Harry were well
acquainted from twenty years before when, every summer, -
Matt returned to spend his three-month summer holiday among
his own.
When I was a boy, Harry remembers, Matt used to come
around to the pitch at Orbiston and play with us. He was always
a gentle, decent kind of man, a lovely fella.
When Jock Dodds helped lure Charlie Mitten away from Old
Trafford Busby was angry. But he had not lived in an ivory
tower and was well versed in the ways of the world. Yet, for all
his bonhomie once the business was done, for all his fondness
for characters like Dodds and McGrath, he was unforgiving
when impropriety tarnished his own patch. This points to the
difference between Busby the man and Busby the manager.
160
One doubts whether Johnny Carey, for example, would fit in
_ the good lad category. In the lexicon of pro football, then as
now, good lads are game for a laugh, a drink or a gamble
and tolerant rather than idealistic about life. Johnny Morris was
a good lad, Charlie Mitten also. Matt Busby was good in those
terms, but only up to a point. When it came to running his
football club he was against goodladmanship if it ran counter
to the laws of the Football Association. Thus, as McGarth
vouches, he remained firm on his principles. He also minded
his behaviour.
Twelve months after leaving England, Charlie Mitten was
forced to return when Colombia joined FIFA and became
bound by Football Association law. Charlie went to see Busby
hoping for a pardon. I was a better player, I told him, I'd
learned a lot about the game in South America. Id played for
Millionairos with Alfredo Di Stefano and some of the best
foreign players.
Busby was unimpressed. United still hadnt replaced him
but he had to go. He was fined 250 and suspended for six
months, before being transferred to Fulham for 20,000.
During his suspension Busby refused to let him train at Old
Trafford. No contamination could be allowed although he was
still fond of Cheeky Charlie. Mitten played for a pub team on
Sunday mornings to keep fit.
The Bogota Affair opened Matts eyes, made him realise how
vulnerable his family and the English game in general was to a
world beyond its narrow boundaries. Money talked, and the
noise would only grow louder and more insistent.
Mittens defection was reflected in the following seasons
performance. The statistics of season 50/51 dont reveal the
extent of the disruption caused. United finished second in the
First Division, ostensibly an improvement on the previous year,
but lost 1-0 to Birmingham in the sixth round of the FA Cup.
Uniteds high league placing behind champions Portsmouth
was due to a powerful finish to the season in which eight
victories in the last ten games enabled them to leapfrog past
clubs who had been in serious contention when it mattered. The
absence of Mitten threw the whole side out of kilter. Astute
shuffling of his resources had always served Busby in the past,
161
and in the 50/51 season he did his best to conjure his way out of
trouble once more. Billy McGlen, a defender, was given the
number 11 shirt for the first seven games. That failed. Next it
was Harry McShanes turn. Harry lasted until Christmas.
United had a shocking holiday series, losing three games in
succession, two of them at Old Trafford to Bolton and, 3-5, to
Sunderland.
People began muttering about new players. Even Busby
himself was the target of some speculation. In January he was
forced to go public to deny a rumour that he was in danger of
losing his job. IM NOT GETTING THE SACK the headline screeched
from the front page of a popular sports magazine, All Football.
Busby, most uncharacteristically, lent credence to the stories by
the vehemence of his response.

Let me scotch first those rumours which I am told go the
rounds  I am not resigning. I am not being sacked and
there is neither trouble or panic in our camp. These
rumours seem to have started because we are not the
glamour team we used to be. Maybe we are not. You
cannot stay on top all the time and we had a longer run
than usual. A set of players hit such a wonderful peak only
once ina lifetime. Now I admit we do not appear to be as
good as we were  but we are not as bad either. We are in
the top half of the First Division and there are many worse
teams in the land. We had a big shock when Charlie Mitten
went to Bogota. We were not prepared for that. Who was?
Some of my critics say I should have gone out and spent
some of our 50,000 profit. Well you can call me a canny
Scotsman if you like, but I dont believe you can buy
success.

Busbys remedy was to try some more alterations to the side.
He preferred the men he knew to outsiders not versed in his way
of playing the game. There was also a serious question mark
against the ability of many players who would have cost large
transfer-fees. He believed that this was a non-vintage era in
English football. The game was still suffering the after-effects
of the war, for during the six years between 1939 and 1945 no
new players had been properly blooded in the professional
game. Good news was coming from Jimmy Murphy and Bert
162
_ Whalley: the kids were better than theyd been. So, instead of
buying, Matt held his nerve. Jack Rowley moved to outside-left
for the final Christmas game and stayed there for the rest of the
season. Johnny Aston was pushed up to centre-forward, being
replaced by Billy McGlen at full-back. Harry McShane
switched from left to outside-right and a youngster, Don
Gibson, made his debut at right-half. Thus, the crisis was
beaten off, time was borrowed. That at least was the intention.
The youngsters who were the source of all Busbys hopes in
the summer of 1951 included Roger Byrne, who at twenty-two
hardly fitted the category of kid. Roger, a left-winger, had been
signed in 1949 from local soccer where he played for Ryder
Brow Boys Club. Jeff Whitefoot was a wing-half, a beautiful
striker of the ball who had already played for the first team, the
youngest ever to do so, at sixteen years of age. Jackie
Blanchflower and Mark Jones were two more of whom great
things were expected. The most exciting of all the youngsters
was seventeen-year-old Cliff Birkett, a winger from Newton-
le-Willows, who was certain to be a future star. Busby reassured
his directors that the future would be as exciting as the past.
James Gibson had signed his last minutes as chairman on 20
June 1950. He was to die on 11 September 1951. Mr Gibsons
dying wish, conveyed by Mrs Anne Gibson to their son Alan
who would succeed him on the board, was that the young man
should support Mr. Busby at board meetings. James Gibsons
role in the rebirth of Manchester United, the values and
disciplines he brought to the task of administering the club,
have too often been overlooked. He was a fine man, far from
typical of the boardroom breed. The football on the field bore
witness to him as well as The Boss in the dressing-room.
A poignant entry in the United minutes of that period, its
presence due as much to Busby as to Gibson, records that
United made an ex-gratia payment to Billy Meredith to enable
the great old man to clear the mortgage on his home.
Matt Busby had little reason for real optimism as United
faced into the 51/52 season. The memory of January was fresh
in his mind. In his seventh season hed delivered one trophy
and, so far, the promise of his early days had not entirely been
fulfilled. United were always to be respected but, in a less than
163
~

enthralling First Division, they were no longer feared. The club
made a profit of 22,677 in 1951, and that summer Busby spent
25,000 to buy Johnny Berry from Birmingham. Berry was
twenty-five, fast, brave and direct, a right-winger with guts and
an eye for goals. At the end of the 49/50 season Berry had
scored one of the best goals ever seen at Old Trafford to defeat
United.
Busbys best hope was that United would not lose ground.
Remarkably they won the Championship. The 52 Champion-
ship is hardly what Matt Busby is remembered for, but this
achievement bears unique testimony to his football wisdom,
and his powers of man-management. The themes never
changed, the simple gospel of simple football preached to men
who had been listening to it for seven years. The backbone of
the Championship team was formed by the heroes of 48. Carey
moved to right-half in mid-December, just short of his thirty-
third birthday, now to scale new heights as a player and a
leader. Johnny Aston missed the first half of the season through
illness. In January he returned at centre-forward to play his
part, vastly different from his role in 48. Ernie Bond, a young
man signed from non-league football, played outside-left early
on before Jack Rowley replaced him. Thirty-two years of age,
Rowley was the magnificent inspiration of Uniteds challenge
for a title it had seemed theyd never win. Jack scored hat-tricks
in the first two games of the season, another against Stoke City
in September and finished with three goals against Arsenal,
who were beaten in style 6-1 on 26 April 1952. The Champion-
ship trophy was back at Old Trafford for the first time since
1911. Jack Rowleys thirty goals did most to secure the triumph.
For Rowley, Carey, Chilton, Cockburn, Stan Pearson and
Johnny Aston, whod been with The Boss from the start, this
was a glorious, unexpected last hurrah.
For Roger Byrne, whod made his debut at Liverpool in
November, the old heroes valedictory season was a beginning.
Hed played left-back on his debut but finished the season
scoring seven vital goals in seven games at outside-left. For
Matt Busby the Championship was a relief, some time bought,
proof that people mattered as he'd always thought they did,
that, properly prepared, they were capable of anything.
164
10
An End  A Beginning
Matt Busby was like a god. Youd
be conscious of him sitting in the
stand, you wanted to show him how
good you were.
Bobby Charlton

Matt Busbys most profound achievement in his first seven
seasons at Manchester United was the creation of the kind of
football club he would have wished, as a player, to play for. He
had been firm in his resolve to acquire the power he believed
was necessary to do the job. He had used that power wisely. In
so far as was possible, given professional footballs iniquitous
governing ethos, the club he had built reflected his values. This
applied both to the football played and to the atmosphere in the
dressing-room and on the training ground. The United cap-
taincy was important to Busby. His skippers were no mere
coin-tossers. In this respect Manchester United were about to
make a significant change. At thirty-three Johnny Carey had
decided to accept an offer to manage Blackburn Rovers,
declining the coaching job Matt Busby offered him at Old
Trafford.
Carey had served Manchester United magnificently. In his
time at the club, stretching back to 1937, he had played in nine
different positions. More importantly, he provided leadership
which was (the narrower, rather grudging dressing-room per-
spective notwithstanding) symbolic of the ethos Matt Busby
had sought to inculcate into his football club from the beginn-
ing. Carey was loyal and decent, his behaviour always impec-
cable. He played the game graciously.
Johnny Carey was neither militant nor one of the lads. But
that was not what was required of him. Like Busby, he came
165

a
to stand for something by which Manchester United wished to
be known: something that was noble rather than feckless,
dignified rather than coarse.
Before he departed Carey was invited to the boardroom at
Old Trafford for a small celebration with the directors. This was
the first time he had ever been invited upstairs.
Roger Byrne replaced Carey as captain. He was a very
different type. Byrne was a tough, cool customer. He was his
own man, intelligent, with a view of the world which didnt
conform to dressing-room values, or anyone elses for that
matter. He respected The Boss but he wasnt a Bosss man. He
had a temper. When roused, Byrne was defiant. Nevertheless,
Busby valued him highly as a player and a potential leader. But
there would be only one Boss at Old Trafford.
Any assessment of Busbys first phase in management must
extend beyond trophies won. His club would be about the
character of the people in it: men like Byrne, Bert Whalley,
Tom Curry, Bill Inglis, Jimmy Murphy and Arthur Powell.
Here gifted young footballers experienced the professional
game for the first time. Here, as Busby through his own
experience knew only too well, dreams dissolved to become a
reality.
Apart from Busby, Jimmy Murphy was the most influential
of these characters. Jimmy Murphy lived in Whalley Range.
Every morning he was up first to make a coal fire in the kitchen,
and cook breakfast. His wife would get up after her morning
cup of tea to get their six kids ready for school. Except for
Sundays this was all the family saw of Jimmy. He worked long
hours. Hed been doing this for seven years.
Jimmy travelled to work by train  he never drove acar.
Whalley Range to London Road (now Piccadilly) then to the
railway station that ran alongside Old Trafford. He was an
anonymous commuter, always smartly dressed ina suit, striped
tie, white shirt, in winter a dark overcoat. He was medium
height. Hed be hard to place on the train. A small businessman
perhaps, under pressure to keep things going. He bore an air of
restrained anxiety about him. Jimmy couldnt wait to get to
work.
166
By the early Fifties a man of lesser passion would have been
demoralised. He worked a seventy or eighty hour week with
little to show for the time invested. The first teams success had
had little to do with the reserve and youth policies. The old boys
had done it. Roger Byrne, the best of the newcomers, had
bypassed the system. Roger was a grammar-school boy whod
done his National Service before signing for United as a young
man. When Matt needed a player hed invariably had to forsake
his principles and go out and buy. Johnny Berry . . . Harry
McShane. . . Johnny Downie. . . Reg Allen.
Jimmys reserves had been disappointing. Brian Birch, an
inside-forward hed fancied had not made it. Billy Redman was
in and out of the side. Don Gibson was another fringe player.
Tom McNulty had done well at full-back. That was about it.
Jimmy hadnt set the world on fire. But hed tried.
And now he was optimistic again, about Cliff Birkett, Jeff
Whitefoot, Mark Jones and Jackie Blanchflower. There was
another lad, John Doherty, an inside-forward, a certainty.
So he kept going, working in the bowels of the club away
from the glittering surface. He was feared was Jimmy. The
older players didnt like him. He was aggressive. He swore at
them. They usually encountered him when theyd been
dropped to the reserves. For him it was life and death in the
Central League, for them humiliation, beneath them, a
bleeding chore. It was bad enough being out of the side without
having this fucker screaming at you.
The first thing Jimmy would do on Saturday afternoon was
rip up the opposition team-sheet. There would be well known
names on it. Forget them, they cant play. Theyre useless,
names, hed spit, kicking the ball of paper into the corner of the
room.
He was a man you could take an instant dislike to, Harry
McShane remembers. He was a very aggressive character,
always het up, a typical Welshman. He didnt encourage you at
all. He told you. You could hear him shouting in the other
- dressing-room, get bloody stuck in that was his favourite
expression.
He never tried to tell the older lads like Harry how to play,
but made sure that the reserves was no sinecure. To be fair to
167
Jimmy, he never asked the young lads to kick people, he only |
harnessed the kickers to do that, Harry explains. Jimmys
dedication was unbelievable to McShane whod been around
and knew the going rate elsewhere.
We were training at the ground one morning and I was
running round the track with John Doherty who I was pretty
close to. Wed played Blackpool away in a Central League
match on the Saturday. We won 9-1. John scored 3 or 4 and
made the rest. He was a brilliant young player. There was no
doubt he was going to make it. Jimmy appeared at the end of
the tunnel. John said, I wonder what hes doing out. I said,
What the hell are you worried about we won 9-1. So anyway
we could see that he was going to collar us. He called John over
and told him to be back at 2 oclock.
The next day when I saw John I asked him what was up. He
said, When we were playing Blackpool I knocked a ball up the
left for the winger when I should have switched the play to the
right. So I said that was only once and he said Never mind,
this is what you have. to do all the time. 
They spent an hour recreating the situation, with Murphy
explaining the importance of changing the play. The quest for
perfection never ceased. Beating Blackpool 9-1 was not the
object. Jimmy had his own standards. To young fellows he
seemed a very hard man to please and an hour was arelatively
short stint on the training ground. Some afternoons Jimmy
would be out until five oclock drilling home some basic element
of the game. The basics, you had to get the basics right. Jimmy
wasnt a coach with a text-book full of complicated stratagems,
he was a teacher with a simple set of precepts. They were the
ones football was founded on: passing, changing the focus of
attack, marking your man when you had to, losing him when
the ball was with a red shirt.
Getting the ball. Tackling. Winning it. Make it bloody hard
for them when youve got it. Make it bloody harder for them
when theyve got it. Guts and desire were the things Jimmy
sought. Hunger. He loved talent, but he took it for granted that
his lads had talent. Otherwise they wouldnt be ere. He
loved the great players: Carey, Cockburn, Rowley, Pearson.
He loved them for their talent but he loved them more for their
168
spirit. They were hard men, the great players, hungry bastards
once the whistle blew. Theyd slaughter you; psychologically
they were deadly. Talent was a weapon, not an end in itself but
a means, and fulfilling your talent depended on guts, heart,
being tougher on yourself than others. That was his lesson: be
hard. On yourself.
Jimmy worked from nine in the morning until late at night;
first with the full-time pros until lunchtime, then the afternoons
of remedial teaching. At six oclock on Tuesdays and Thursdays
hed be at the Cliff with the youths, part-time pros and
amateurs. There was no going through the motions at nights.
These youngsters were the future, Jimmy was as hard on them
as the older pros. He liked to get to the pub for a couple of pints
of ale before closing time. He smoked like a chimney. It would
be eleven-thirty when he got home to a silent house, the embers
dying on his morning fire.
On Sundays after Mass hed be at the ground with Matt, Bert
Whalley, and Ted Dalton who'd be treating the injured. Theyd
have a whisky about twelve oclock, then Jimmy would go off to
the Quadrant, the pub, tucked away behind the Lancashire
cricket ground, used by Uniteds players, then home at half-
past two for lunch with the family. Football was his life, from
day to day, hour to hour, minute to minute. His heart, like Billy
Merediths, was always full of it. The man in the pub on
Sunday lunchtimes was not aggressive. He would laugh and
joke, there was a real warmth about him but whenever the
subject switched from football he would switch it back. Jimmy
Murphys idea of a discussion was a debate about the respective
merits of Stan Matthews and Tom Finney. He was himself a
Finney man, so was Matt and most pros. Finney was harder.
On Monday mornings for seven years Jimmy set off from
Whalley Range to engage in the thankless task of turning talent
into professionalism. Most brilliant kids didnt have it. By the.
time Jimmy found out hed spent a lot of passion.
Jackie Blanchflower was one of the first of the new kids to
arrive in Manchester. He was from East Belfast, a Protestant
working-class ghetto, his father an iron-turner in the shipyards.
His brother, Danny, seven years older, was already a pro with
Barnsley. Jackie was medium height, sturdy, with jet-black hair
169
and a pleasant round face. Like his brother Danny, he was
intelligent and articulate. The football came from their
mothers side. She worked in the ropeworks and played for a
ladies team in Belfast. Their father was away fighting during
the war.
He arrived in Manchester's Victoria Station at seven-thirty
one morning in March 1949, having travelled over on the ferry
from Belfast to Heysham. He remembers it was a dismal day.
Not horrible or rotten, dismal. Matt Busby met him at Victoria,
and they went to the Busby house in Chorlton for breakfast.
Being only sixteen, Jackie had to have a legal guardian to leave
Ireland. Busby had signed the papers.
Jean made him breakfast, and afterwards he went with Matt
to Old Trafford. The ground was a mess, and had yet to be re-
opened for League football. The pitch itself hadnt been used
since 1941. It was just a field full of weeds. They were building a
little covered stand on the popular side of the ground, and there
was a Nissan hut where the dressing-rooms are today. Jackie
remembers the contrast between the glamour hed imagined,
the glorious sense of the 48 Cup win hed listened to on the
wireless, and the bleak ruin he walked through that morning.
At lunchtime he met Louis Rocca, an old man sitting having his
lunch in the Nissan hut. Louis didnt like skins on his tomatoes,
so he was peeling them off when Jackie was introduced to him.
Rocca took Jackie to see his digs at Mrs Brownes. He was
lonely. The next day he moved into the digs and reported for
work as an apprentice plumber. For the time being his football
would be restricted to Tuesday and Thursday nights at the Cliff.
If he did well hed sign pro on his seventeenth birthday.
When he went training the talent scared him. He was a wing-
half, skilful, well balanced, a neat passer of the ball. He was a
natural. But some of the other young players seemed un-
naturally gifted. He started playing in the A team. Bill Foulkes
played right-back, Roger Byrne left-back, Jeff Whitefoot,
Mark Jones and Jackie were the half-back line. Cliff Birkett was
outside-right. Brian Birch was inside-left. It was a brilliant
team. Playing open-age football in the Manchester League they
won everything, including the Gylcriss Cup, the blue riband of
junior football in the area.
170
Jackie signed pro when he was seventeen. He could forget
about plumbing. This was a big moment. You got your blazer
with the Manchester United Football Club crest on it. He and
Mark Jones shared a room at Mrs Brownes, and became great
pals. Mark played for England Schoolboys. He was a Barnsley ~
lad, a centre-half, a big powerful fellow, but gentle, a country-
man who loved to go shooting. He smoked a pipe at eighteen
and wore a trilby. He bred canaries and budgies which he kept
in an aviary at home, and was engaged to June, his childhood
sweetheart back in Barnsley.
The digs werent great. Mr Browne liked a drink; pissed, he
would fight with Mrs Browne and shout at the two lodgers.
They told Bert Whalley. Bert moved them to Mrs Watsons.
Mrs Watson ran a boarding house at number 5 Birch Avenue,
beside Lancashire cricket ground. There were two big houses
knocked into one which meant she could cater for about twenty
lodgers. When Mark and Jackie moved in, the house was used
mainly by commercial travellers and long-distance lorry
drivers. It was a relaxed, warm place, as such places go. Albert
Watson was a character, in his sixties, but still game for a laugh.
Too game, as things turned out.
Mark and Jackie spenta lot of time at the pictures, using their
free passes to go to the Gaiety, Odeon or Oxford cinemas in
town, or the Trafford at Trafford Bar just up the road from the
digs. David Pegg arrived from Doncaster in the summer of
1950, a Yorkshire lad whod come with a big reputation after
playing outside-left for England Boys. He was a cocky lad, a
flash dresser with an eye for the girls.
Mark and Jackie progressed through the reserves, both
making appearances in the 51/52 Championship side, Jackie
just once, making his debut at right-half the same day as Roger
Byrne at Anfield. Mark Jones played three games at centre-half
when Chilton was injured.
United went back to North America in 1952. Mark, Jackie
and Denis Viollet were in the party, as was Roger Byrne, now
an established first team player. They sailed on the Queen
Elizabeth from Southampton for a tour that would last eight
weeks. One night on the outward sailing the United players
were invited for dinner in the QEs first-class restaurant.
171
Champagne was sent to their table by a large, rotund gent with
silver hair who raised his glass to toast them. Louis Edwards
was sitting on the ships first-class balcony, cigar in hand, a jolly
smile on his face. i
Louis was a friend of Matts, a butcher, co-owner with his
brother Douglas of Louis C. Edwards and Sons (Manchester)
Ltd. As far as the lads were concerned he was a wealthy face
theyd seen around the ground on match days.
Edwards and Busby had first met a couple of years previously
at the Opera House where they were introduced by a mutual
friend, Tommy Appleby. Edwards and his wife Muriel became
close friends of Matt and Jean. Unless the show was really
special Matt would often be bored by the interval, and, since
the backstage stargazing held little appeal for him, he and Louis
started slipping out halfway through the programme to find a
quiet pub somewhere adjacent to the Opera House where
theyd talk about their respective businesses. Champagne
Louis was easy company. He hung on Matts every word. Many
of their conversations focused on money, the way it could screw
up a football club, as it had for Matt in the cases of Johnny
Morris and Charlie Mitten. You couldnt buy success, Matt
explained to Louis, but unlike other businesses where success
generated more money, in football it usually generated more
problems about money. Players started out happy for afirst
team place, then when success came they started looking for
material reward. If they played for England and listened to the
gossip in the international camp the going rate elsewhere
became your problem.
The death of James Gibson and the succession of Harold
Hardman to the chairmanship at Old Trafford had made
matters worse. Hardman had no money and didnt like
extravagance of any kind. Busby didnt want to go on a
spending spree in the transfer-market unless it was unavoid-
able, but he wanted the best for his players, the best hotels and
travel and other perks, like Blackpool and golf at Davyhulme.
He didnt want to be profligate, he wanted to do things right.
They had to think big. Floodlights, Europe, a large squad of
players of first team quality. All these things cost money.
Louis Edwards understood. Hardman was sceptical. Louis
172
was a big thinker himself. He was also connected in a way to the
United tradition as Busby cherished it, the family club for
Outsiders. Louiss eldest sister Beatrice had married Louis
Roccas cousin Joe in 1926. Edwards was almost family.
The United States and Canada gave the new English
champions a big welcome. They played to huge crowds, 35,000
came out to watch them play Stuttgart at Yankee Stadium.
Spurs and Atlas from Mexico were also touring America that
summer. The weather was warm, the settings glamorous.
United went to Hollywood to tour the studios, meeting Bob
Hope and other stars. They played Los Angeles, Montreal,
Toronto, Chicago, Vancouver and Detroit. The hectic schedule
didnt detract from the enjoyment.
When we got back to Mrs Watsons there were these new
faces, Jackie recalls. Duncan Edwards and Gordon Clayton
had joined the family. We were a bit disturbed, somebody had
broken into our little circle, we were a bit jealous, probably a bit
too hard on them, Blanchflower admits.
Gordon Clayton remembers the day he and Duncan arrived
in Manchester: It was Monday, June ninth 1952. We came by
train together. Bert Whalley met us at London Road Station
and took us to Mrs_ Watsons. We _ both started
work on Wednesday, June eleventh. I went to a factory in
Altrincham, Duncan went as an apprentice carpenter in
Trafford Park. I lasted eighteen months but Duncan hated it.
He wanted to play football and he was so good there was never
any doubt about him making it. He was never going to be a
carpenter. So he went on the ground staff  on the brush we
called it  after a while.
Gordon Clayton came from Cannock, a small town in
Staffordshire mining country. Duncan was from Dudley.
Gordon played in goal for Staffordshire Boys, Duncan left-half
for Worcestershire. They were both eligible for Birmingham
Boys, which is how they met and became inseparable friends. I
was fourteen and a half when I met him, we were the same age,
born within a month and two days of each other, he on October
first 1936, me on November third, Gordon reflects.
We both trained at Wolves on Tuesday and Thursday nights.
Stan Cullis had cottoned onto the youth policy thing, so had
173
Chelsea and a few other clubs. They all wanted Duncan. He
stood out. He was built like a man, not tall, but his torso and
legs, bloody hell. I mean I can show you photographs, you look
at him and you look at me and theres no comparison. And yet I
was regarded as a well-built young man. He was something else.
He had this incredible urge to play. Duncan was a very
dominant personality as a schoolboy. People used to say he was
arrogant, he was big-headed, but he wasnt really. As kids you
think that when somebodys got extraordinary talent.
Edwardss talent was extraordinary. He played for England
Schoolboys a year under age and captained the side the
following year when Clayton was selected in goal. We were
both Wolves fans. Theyd had a great team in the late Forties
and early Fifties: Billy Wright, Johnny Hancocks, Jimmy
Mullen. We didnt know each other but Duncan and I used to
stand on the terraces. I suppose we should have signed for
Wolves, but I think Joe Armstrong got to the Edwards first
and that was it. Clayton smiles.
Gladstone Edwards was a metal-polisher. He and his wife,
Sarah Ann, had two children born to them. Carole Anne, born
when Duncan was ten, died after fourteen weeks. Sarah Ann
fed Duncan on Ostermilk and rusks. He was always a big lad,
nine-and-a-half pounds at birth, putting on two pounds every
week. He was a healthy, well-behaved boy. He had an
insatiable appetite for football, taking his ball everywhere,
even when the Edwards were visiting friends. Gladstone would
warn him not to bring a ball, but Duncan would always manage
to hide one somewhere on his person. When he was ten he was
playing with grown-up men. Later his mother would recall the
constant cries outside the house: Come on Dunc, were picking
sides. The only argument was about whod get Dunc.
Duncan, Gladstone and Sarah Ann were invited to
Manchester. When he came back Duncan urged Gordon to
accept the invitation hed been sent. Theyre different, they
look after you, you'll enjoy it, he told his friend.
I went with my mum and day, Gordon says, we were met by
Bert Whalley. In the letter he sent us he said wed recognise him
by the flower in his buttonhole. I'll be standing at the barrier, Ill
have a blazer on and a flower in my buttonhole. And he did.
174
Gordon remembers the taxi-ride to Old Trafford: The first
thing that struck me coming from Cannock was the size of the
place. This is big, I thought. Then when we got to the ground
there was this smell. It was the fumes from Trafford Park. Ill
never forget that Old Trafford smell. When I think of
Manchester United I always get that funny smell.
Bert was a lovely man, wed made our mind up in the taxi
really. I was never going anywhere else. This was it, Man-
chester United, the 48 Cup-Final, Carey, Pearson, Rowley,
there was something different about them, something vital and
exciting. Of course theyd just won the League but it was
the people, the idea of Matt Busby who was a god. And yet
Bert was so human. When we walked into the ground we met
Jimmy Murphy. He was inalittle office with a kitchen off the
back. Jimmy looked like a bull-dog, his face was like a
bull-dogs but again there was a warmth about him, you felt he
was genuinely happy and pleased to see you.
Bert showed us round the ground and then said: Come on,
I'll take you to the place youre going to stay if you come to
Manchester United. That was Mrs Watsons.
Clubs werent allowed to sign boys until after the last
international of the season. England Boys beat Wales 5-1 at St
Andrews, Birmingham Citys ground. I'll never forget the
scene outside the ground after the game, says Clayton. We
came out of the dressing-room and there was a compound wired
off just outside the Players Entrance. All the mothers and
fathers were there and all the scouts. Reg Priest, Uniteds
Midland Scout was standing with Jimmy Murphy and Bert
Whalley. All eyes were on Duncan. We walked over to Bert
and Jimmy. That was when the others knew.
Duncan said hed meet me on the train. I'll save you a
seat, he promised. He got on at Dudley, I got on at Stafford. I
can see it now. The train is pulling in to Stafford and he is
hanging out the window waving. Hed saved me aseat. The
train was empty. But he saved my seat!
Their first day at old Trafford was a come-down. Especially
for Duncan. For the first time in his life he was anonymous.
They walked into the gym, a plain boarded room with wallbars
screwed to the wall and two punchballs hanging from the
175
ceiling. Chilton was working one. Hed been a boxer in the
Army and he was stood at this bloody Speed Ball smacking it,
Gordon remembers. Mark Jones was working on the other
one. He was obviously modelling himself on Chilton. Neither
man paid any attention to the two kids.
They were small news in Mrs Watsons as well. Gifted
youngsters were no novelty at United. You began at the bottom
of a well-populated hierarchy. The next morning Gordon
Clayton encountered more indifference: I showed up for work
at the factory. The manager, Albert Hall, showed me round.
The word had clearly gone round  another United player 
they used this place a lot. I walked into the section Id be
working in and a fellow says to me, Hey young *un, what
religion are you? I said, Im C of E. You might as well pack
your fucking bags now, youve no chance here. Youve got to be
a Catholic to play for United. This was the first time Id ever
heard there was any suggestion of religion coming into it. But
the guy was proved wrong. It was a fallacy. Matt and Jimmy
were Catholics, but Bert was one of The Big Three and he was a
Sunday School Preacher, a Methodist. I went a couple of times
with Duncan. What hed do, hed invite us to his house for
Sunday tea. Wed automatically go home to the Midlands at
weekends, but if you were staying Bert would often ask you
round for afternoon tea.
Wed have tomatoes and ham salad and afterwards wed go
to the Church service. He did it with all the lads.
Whalley would also invite the senior players to his Sports-
mans Services. Henry Cockburn and Johnny Aston attended
several, reading the lesson occasionally. .
The beginning of the 1952/53 season was difficult for
Manchester United. They. were Champions, but the magnifi-
cent drive which won the title also drained the final drops of
inspiration from what was in essence the 48 Cup team. This
period, between August and the end of October when United
languished at the wrong end of the League table, tested Matt
Busby as hed never been tested before. His first great team was
finished and he knew it. There were some promising young
players at the club, Duncan Edwards being by far the most
exciting of them, but the distance between promise and
176
fulfilment was vast. So much could go wrong, as Busby and his
staff knew.
The case of Cliff Birkett, the wonder-boy of 1948, proved the
point. Birkett had made his debut at seventeen playing nine
games towards the end of the 50/51 season. The promise was
never fulfilled. Birkett never added to his nine appearances.
Maybe he was pushed too soon. Maybe his temperament was
wrong. What was undeniable was the degree to which even the
best judges could be wrong about a youngsters chances of
making the transition from reserve to first team football.
Placing all your faith in breeding your own players was a
gamble. Ability could be assessed, but character was the x-
factor; you could never be sure how brilliance would respond
when it was faced by the rigour of first team conflict.
Hence the appeal of the transfer-market where you could buy
the finished article. Costly players may not be perfect, but you
knew what you were getting. Most of the time.
United paid a record transfer fee for a goalkeeper to acquire
Reg Allen from QPR in 1950. Allen proved himself worth the
money, but by the autumn of 1952 Reg was a sick man. Hed
been a prisoner-of-war for four and a half years, an experience
which left him suffering from manic depression. The symptoms
had manifested themselves from time to time after Reg joined
United. Sadly, on 4 October, during Uniteds important away
fixture against Wolves at Molineux, Reg cracked. Hed been
playing brilliantly and there had been talk of an England cap.
At half-time in the Wolves game Allen disappeared. Jackie
Blanchflower, who was twelth man, explains what happened:
Reg was desperate to play for England. At half-time someone
brought a paper into the dressing-room with the England team
init. Bert Williams, Wolves keeper had been selected. Reg just
left. Nobody realised until we were ready to go back out onto
the pitch. We thought he was in the bathroom. But hed gone.
There were no subs in those days, so that was it.
 The Boss was amazing, he never panicked. Johnny Carey
went in goal and Busby told the press afterwards that Reg had
got pheumonia. United lost 6-2.
United gradually hauled themselves up the League table to
finish the season in eighth position. Seventeen-year-old David
177
Pegg made his debut for United at home to Middlesborough on
6 December. Pegg kept his place for most of the season. In
March 1953 Busby paid 29,999 to buy Tommy Taylor, a
twenty-one-year-old centre-forward from Barnsley. Taylor had
made a sensational start to his career in League football,
scoring twenty-six goals in forty-four games for Barnsley, and
was coveted by every big club in the country. Busby was happy
to break Uniteds record in the transfer-market. In order to
spare Taylor the pressure of a 30,000 price-tag Busby agreed
with Barnsley chairman, Joe Richards, that the cheque be made
out for 1 short of the true figure. A pound note changed hands
to seal the deal.
On 4 April, in the second of Uniteds three Easter games,
Matt Busby introduced seventeen-year-old Duncan Edwards to
First Division football. It proved to be an inauspicious debut,
United losing 4-1 at home to Cardiff City, their solitary goal
scored by Roger Byrne who, having started the season at
outside-left, was now established at left-back.
Duncan Edwards played just one game in the first team. His
main task that season was to help United confirm their
reputation as the best club in the country for young players to
join by winning the newly inaugurated FA Youth Cup. It is,
perhaps, more accurate to use the word establish in place of
confirm, for Busbys successes had been achieved with a mature
team and some sceptics doubted the propaganda coming out of
Old Trafford about youth.
David Pegg showed distinct promise in the first team; another
seventeen-year-old, John Doherty, had played a handful of games
and was being much talked about; but Mark Jones and Jackie
Blanchflower had just two games between them that season.
Roger Byrne was an undoubted success but at twenty-three could
hardly be described as a symbol ofa flourishing youth policy.
So winning the FA Youth Cup was an important target for
Busby and Jimmy Murphy. Facing criticism from shareholding
supporters at Uniteds AGM, Busby had made large claims
about the future, asserting that the club had 200,000 worth of
youngsters in the reserve and youth teams. He hoped the FA
Youth Cup would substantiate this claim. United progressed to
meet Wolves in the two-legged final.
178
John Doherty, a key member of the side, was injured before
the first leg at Old Trafford, and a replacement was urgently
required. Bert Whalley was sent to Ireland where the renowned
soccer nursery, Home Farm, was said to have a prolific teenage
goalscorer who would suit.
The story of how United signed Liam Whelan illustrates the
haphazard, unscientific nature of scouting for talent. Billy
Behan recounts: Bert came over with some other fellas name
I forget it now  but I explained to him that the kid was really a
centre-half who was only scoring goals in schoolboy football
because of his size. Billy Behan watched schoolboy football
every weekend, Saturday and Sunday. He knew every useful
kid in Ireland, which really, in those days, meant Dublin.
Behan wasa genius, a rare example of reality in a business
coloured by myth. The Republic of Ireland has, arguably,
produced only five great players since Behan began working for
United, informally at first, when they signed Johnny Carey in
1937. Beginning with Carey, Manchester United were gifted all
the other greats, Liam Whelan, John Giles, Tony Dunne and
Paul McGrath. Only Dunne  4,000- and McGrath, at around
30,000 cost United fees. Behans method was painstaking. He
would go back time after time to see his man play, on all kinds of
pitches, in big games and small.
What did he look for? The basics, he muses now, control,
passing, and the ability to read a game, theyre the three
essentials. The great players always read the game correctly and
were good enough to do something to keep it going if it was
going well or change it if the game needed changing. Ability in
itself was never enough.
Liam Whelan had the basics and a bit more. He had beautiful
control, scored goals and was a tall strong lad not easily
intimidated. But he was deemed to lack pace, a judgement
Behan disputes: The acid test of pace is, do they get back at you
once youve gone past them? They never got back at Liam, the
defenders were dead once hed done them. Bert Whalley took
~ some convincing. Well hed been sent with this name, and I
said, Look, take Liam, hell do the job for you. But Bert
went back to consult Jimmy Murphy  I think he was abit afraid
of Jimmy - in the end they got in touch and Liam went over.
179
Almost twenty-one thousand people attended the FA Youth
Cup final first leg against Wolves at Old Trafford, for Busbys
optimism had generated great expectation in Manchester. That
night, 4 May 1953, the most optimistic expectations were
surpassed. Before an enthralled crowd, Jimmy Murphys boys
gave a devastating display to win 7-1. Liam Whelan scored and
did so again in the drawn second leg at Molineux. But it was the
game at Old Trafford that sent a signal to the football world.
Something extraordinary was fermenting in Manchester. The
names of Edwards, Colman, Pegg and Scanlon began to be
mentioned in Manchester and further afield. Busbys New Idea
was not mere talk. He was breeding his own players and they
were special, had to be to humiliate the Wolves, who were once
more a power under Stan Cullis.
The United team for this historic game makes interesting
reading:

Clayton
Fulton Kennedy
Colman Cope Edwards
McFarlane Whelan Lewis Pegg Scanlon

Eddie Colman, Duncan Edwards, David Pegg, Liam Whelan
and Albert Scanlon became established first team players.
Ronnie Cope played only a single first team game before the
Munich Air Disaster. Of others in that great youth side,
football would hear very little. And that was a vintage year. The
failure rate was high. United went on to win the first five FA
Youth Cups. A glance through the teams shows that most who
helped to win this prize never went on to play regular first team
football.
In 1953 Wilf McGuinness captained England Schoolboys.
Wilf played right-half, and was one of the most coveted
schoolboys in Britain. Wolves, Manchester City and all the big
Lancashire clubs wanted his signature. I hadnt decided where
I was going until I saw United play Wolves in the Youth Cup
Final. Id followed both the Manchester clubs. City had some
good players: Roy Paul, Jimmy Meadows, Don Revie and Bert
180
Trautmann, so Id go to Maine Road and Old Trafford on |
alternate weeks. Id also been to Wolves to look around and it
was great. But the 71 victory in the Youth Cup Final really
swayed me.
United murdered them. They had Duncan, Eddie Colman,
David Pegg, Albert Scanlon and Billy Whelan. I looked and I
knew Eddie Colman had played for Salford Boys and
Lancashire, but hadnt played for England. I thought, if they
can improve me that much Im bound to make it. I thought they
would make me play better than him because I have played for
England and he hasnt. When I saw Duncan Edwards I thought
thank God I am not playing in his position. I thought if they can
get a side to play this great, this is what I want to be in with.
They must make me. That decided me.
I played for Manchester Boys football team for two years
running. I was captain. I was wing-half by then. In my first year I
started as a forward because I was a year younger than the rest
and most probably couldnt get about as much. We played most
of our games at Newton Heath Local. It was the first enclosed
ground I played on which was great. It didnt matter what the
pitch was like, and the pitch didnt have much grass on it, in fact
we used to go up there to watch St Pats and usually St Annes
playing on either Good Friday or Easter Monday morning in
the Catholic Final. They dont have those sort of things now.
We used to love going to see that. So I played my football with
Manchester Boys, and then as a 14-year-old I got picked to
captain England Boys 14-year-olds who played against
Northern Ireland. Jimmy Melia was in the Lancashire Boys
team, he played afterwards for Liverpool. He was the only
other famous boy. The year afterwards was when Bobby
Charlton came into the team. I first met Bobby when 
Manchester Boys played East Northumberland at Maine Road
in a cup competition when we were both 15. I can remember
beating them 3-0. I was the captain most of the time of
everything I played in and I wasa bit cocky. I saw this young lad,
he came up to me after the game when we had beaten them,
and I thought, who is this little lad? He said, We may both be
going to United, because Joe Armstrong had got him. My
name is Bobby Charlton, and I thought who the hell is Bobby
181
Charlton. He was very weak looking in those days, he made
little impression. I thought, well, he is not a bad little player.
Joe Armstrong had told him to make himself known to me.
Bobby had already decided: I had made my mind up early
really. I had played for East Northumberland boys and actually
it was a headmaster in our Jacks school who wrote to Man.
United and recommended that they come up and see me. This
was before I got picked to play for England boys. I was playing
for East Northumberland boys and we played a match at Jarrow
on a frosty morning in January, and my dad said there is a scout
from Manchester United at the game, and after the match he
came to see me. I was so committed to becoming a footballer. I -
was good at it and I found it easy.
Joe Armstrong came and he said, I would like your son to
play for Man. United. Now in those days the ultimate was that
somebody asked you to go for a trial, so to ask you to go was
good. So I said, yes, and I said yes in January even though I
couldnt sign until I left school. I still had to go to school. After
that, within a couple of weeks, I was picked to play for England
boys, and I was in the trials and scored a couple of goals and
played for them and then every club started to knock at the
door, but I had made my mind up. I dont know whetherI had
made my mind up because Man. United had the reputation of
having the best scouting and coaching system or whether I just
wanted to be a footballer and the first one that came along was
going to get me.
A couple of years before, I had listened to the radio when
United won the Cup in 1948. Theyd won the greatest Cup Final
ever played, so that created an aura round them and Matt
Busby.
I watched football, me and our Jack used to go to Newcastle
 it was 15 miles. We went together, the two of us, we very ~
rarely went with our family. We had the Milburn family
connection, but we just paid to go in. School? It was alright to
start with, then as football took over it became less and less
important.
I set off to Manchester at fifteen on my own. I thought it was
a great adventure. I was quite used to travelling: when I was 10
and 11 my Uncle George, who played for Leeds United and was
182
the trainer at Chesterfield, used to invite me down for my
school holidays, so I went for four or five weeks and I used to
watch them. I had travelled on the train on my own when I was
ten, but when I arrived at Manchester, Manchester was black,
the buildings were black and of course there were steam trains,
and I am opening a window to try and see what a fantastic place
I am coming to, and the smoke! Jimmy Murphy met me. When
we were in the taxi going to my digs, which were at Old
Trafford, he said: We have got this player Jeff Whitefoot, a
midfield player, he is going to be great, and we have just signed
a young lad from Dudley in the Midlands called Duncan
Edwards and he has a great right foot and a great left foot, he is
strong in the tackle, he is great in the air, he reads the game and
he can play in any position, and he is fast and has tremendous
enthusiasm. And then he must have realised that he had gone
too far, so he said, And when I knock all the rough edges off
him I am going to make him a decent player. And I thought,
Bloody hell.
I stayed at Mrs Watsons. It was a big house where travelling
salesmen used to stay. It was near Old Trafford cricket ground.
There were ten to twelve of us staying there at various times
because you could walk to the ground. The atmosphere was
brilliant.
My parents had been told that all you had to do on the
ground staff was sweep up and clean up toilets and all that, and
my Mam and Dad said they didnt want me to do that. The first
three weeks I was down I had to go to school. Id been to
grammar school so my parents wanted me to carry on to get my
GSE. I thought, alright, so I transferred to Stretford Grammar
School. The whole curriculum was completely the opposite to
the one at home, and not only that, they wouldnt let me play
for United. I had come down to play for United, I hadnt come
down to go to school, so they said, you cant play for United,
you have to play for us on a Saturday morning. I had been there
for about three weeks and then the season started andI said to
- my Mam, I have to leave. So I left. But you had to work or go
on the ground staff, so the compromise was I went to work. I
didnt go on the ground staff. I went to train as an apprentice
engineer and I did that until I was seventeen.
183
A new generation was arriving as Manchester Uniteds first
great Busby era was drawing to a close. It may, perhaps, be ~
stretching things to say that Matt Busbys first United team was
great. In seven seasons a Championship and an FA Cup had
been won. The record was not spectacular. Something had been
missing. The departures of Johnny Morris and Charlie Mitten,
neither of whom had been satisfactorily replaced, were costly.
Busby nevertheless came as close as any man could have done
in the circumstances to translating James Gibsons pre-war
dream into a post-war reality. He had bought no mediocrities
and the cultivated football he inspired was played by a
Manchester United team largely composed of Manchester
players:
The ultimate test in football management is to measure
achievement against resources. Busby passes with Honours.
The positional switches that transformed Johnny Carey,
Henry Cockburn, Johnny Aston and Chilton from journey-
men pros into international players was the work of a great
conjurer. This is not the stuff of legend, rather proof of
Busbys football wisdom which mocks the canard that he was
merely an expert in man-management. That cliche is self-
defeating anyway, for, as Busby knew better than anybody,
football is played by men. The footballer is not separate from
the person. On the contrary football, as he uniquely under-
stood it, was an expression of character and spirit, not simply a
display of skill.
During seasons 53/54 and 54/55 Manchester United did no
more than maintain a respectable position in the First Division,
finishing fourth and fifth without ever threatening the
Championship contenders. In 53/54 Burnley beat United 5-3
in the third round of the FA Cup; the following season
Manchester City eliminated them in the fourth round.
Those were bleak years for English football. In November
1953 the brilliant Hungarian team, inspired by Ferenc Puskas,
came to Wembley to beat England 6-3. An illusion was
shattered. The smug consensus that the English game was the
best in the world no longer held. Englands humiliation was
complete in Budapest the following May when Hungary won
184
the return game 7-1. The more enlightened in the football
community, Matt Busby and his old Army comrade Arthur
Rowe among them, had long suspected that the best game in
the world was stagnating. While English football stood still,
devoid of energy and imagination, elsewhere, in Europe and
South America, the game was developing towards a new, more
vivid and inspiring realisation of its potential.
In the wake of the Hungarian debacle a Great Debate
raged: on one side a minority who believed that England had
much to learn from this traumatic experience; on the other the
majority who took the view that the Hungarians were
special, a group of magicians from whose performance no
definitive conclusions could be drawn. Arthur Rowe was
among the more vocal critics of the domestic game. He argued
from a position of some strength. The Spurs team with which
he won the First Division in 1950/51 had placed a heavy
premium on the un-English virtues of skill and movement, the
weapons used by the Hungarians to destroy England. Arthur
Rowe had played football in Hungary before the war and
learned from the experience. The football he had known in
England reflected the leaderless, - pre-Busby past, when
managers sat in their offices and the best players made it up as
they went along. Gifted individuals dominated the game.
Skilful forwards faced powerful defenders in a series of
personal battles. English football had never been, in any
formal sense, a contest between two units.
Coming to football with fresh minds the Hungarians had,
like many other nations, redefined the game. The emphasis
was placed on passing and movement. A more fluid and
imaginative version of the best game in the world was
possible if the ball was the instrument of collective rather than
individual will.
The style advocated by Arthur Rowe became known as
push-and-run, and had the merit of being the product of an
open mind. It was not the answer, but a step in the right
direction. England Manager Walter Winterbottom had lots of
ideas but little credibility in the professional game. And no
power. A decent man, much maligned, Winterbottoms job
185
entailed making do with players produced by the Football
League system. His answer to Englands problems was more
coaching. Others wanted players to be fitter, more dedicated to
developing skills.
Matt Busby kept his own counsel. He was familiar with
English footballs weaknesses. The Great Debate would
change nothing. He was not interested in abstractions. As with
the perennial arguments about the maximum wage and the
retain and transfer system, Busby was disinclined to try to
change the world - except the part of the world he
controlled. A few weeks after Englands Wembley defeat Matt
Busby entered his brilliant FA Youth Cup winners in an
International Youth tournament in Zurich, Switzerland. His
solution was not to ape the Continentals but to learn how to
play against them. While playing for Liverpool he had toured
Europe and was as aware as Arthur Rowe of the sterility of the
British game.
Busby could do nothing about the real problem which he
knew to be the Football League itself. From its inception
professional football in England had set its official face against
elitism. The game would not be run in the interests of a few rich
clubs, a few rich players, who were ina class by themselves. In
1900 the Football League had adopted a resolution which
placed a ceiling of 4 a week on wages. Their intention was to
control the professional game, protect smaller clubs from
losing their best players to rich clubs and stem the destructive
greed of players who used the game simply as a means of
enriching themselves!
Thus, unlike Europe and South America where the best
players gravitated to a handful of powerful clubs, in England
they were scattered all over the place, isolated from each other,
big men in small towns bearing the burden of ordinary clubs
expectations. Tom Finney at Preston, Stan Matthews at
Blackpool, Wilf Mannion at Middlesborough, prisoners of gents
like Nat Buck. Great players were born not made was the
wisdom of that age. Matt Busby did not agree.
Nor did he subscribe to the notion that our players simply
arent good enough. Any manager of a top English club had a
186
variety of riches to choose from. There was as little point in
playing football without the quintessential English qualities of
strength, courage and determination as in trying to do so
without the wit and imagination of the Scots and Irish or the
fervour of the Welsh. The ideal was a blend of all these
influences, the mixture that Matt Busby had at his football club.
He was intent on creating his own elite, and so, his scouts
trawled England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland, North and
South, to find the best young players and bring them to Old
Trafford.
In May 1954 Manchester United Youth Team travelled to
Zurich as holders of the FA Youth Cup. Wilf McGuinness and
Bobby Charlton had joined Edwards, Colman, Pegg and
Scanlon in that elite young side, which again defeated Wolves,
winning the second leg of the final 1-0 before 28,000 at
Molineux, having drawn 4-4 at Old Trafford. The importance
Busby attached to the tournament in Zurich is vouched for by
the fact that he, Jimmy Murphy and Bert Whalley accompanied
the squad on their first venture into the unknown.
Bobby Charlton, making his first trip to Europe, testifies to
the value of the experience: The Zurich tournament was avital
part of our education. We played against Italians, Germans and
Yugoslavs and learned about their different ways of playing.
We went three years on the trot and won the first two
tournaments. Then we lost 1-0 to Genoa in the Final. They
never came out of their own half, except once, and we thought
theres something not right here. Wed never encountered
anything like this at home. But they knew what they were
doing, defending in typical Italian style. They wouldnt let you
past, it was frustrating but an amazing education.
The more basic education took place back home. Charlton
experienced the process from beginning to end: Bert and
Jimmy were like brothers. You never seemed to talk to one
without the other. Bert would do the general things and Jimmy
would pick out the young players they thought were important.
Charlton was one of those: I spent a lot of time with Jimmy. I
was a good long passer of the ball and loved to hit spectacular
cross-field passes. You thought that was what the game was
187
about, the spectacular. Especially at United where there were
so many brilliant players.
I had this conceit that I could knock the ball forty or fifty
yards and pinpoint it. And he would point to the risks, The
full-back can run thirty yards and intercept that pass, hed say,
and look at the number of our people youve put out of the
game. The other thing I hated was passing the ball first time. I
always wanted to keep it. As soon as Id got it Id think, right
thats me, Im going to play. You see thats what youd been
able to do as a good schoolboy player. So he had to bash that out
of me. Hed have me in on a Sunday morning, just the two of us
in the middle of the field and he would have me knackered
running back and forward knocking the ball back to him first
time.
Maybe some people would have thought this was ridiculous,
but I accepted it. I wanted to be a professional footballer and
this is the way it had to be. Jimmy was knocking the bad habits
out of me. Jimmy made me aprofessional. From being an
amateur schoolboy who thought he was a good player I
suddenly discovered what it was all about. Keep it simple, give
it to a red shirt, hed insist. The time will come in games
where you'll have to do the difficult things. He was right, of
course.
The principle Busby and Murphy worked from is exemplified
by this work with Bobby Charlton, one of the most prodigiously
gifted players in the history of the English game. The talent
would develop once the basics of team play were instilled. The
qualities of greatness were natural to a degree, acquired in
other respects from childhood experience on streets and
playing fields. You didnt make players by giving them gifts.
The talent was there to begin with. Your job as a teacher was to
nurture it, to preach the simple realities of the professional
game, the basics of team play which, once grasped, would
enable the gifted young to grow and mature alongside others of
their ilk. Busby and Murphy didnt need to go abroad to
discover the secrets of football. From the very beginning they
had preached the gospel of movement and skill allied to
simplicity.
188
The great players did the simple things well. In all the talk of
the great Hungarians nobody had noticed that ninety per cent
of the football they played was simple  superbly executed, but
simple. The right pass, delivered to the right player at the right
time. There was no score in football, just a simple melody -
the rhythm of the team - from which the great players
improvised when they had to. There would be a time for
Bobby Charltons great long passes, but first he had to learn
the melody.
Charltons education began at fifteen in Uniteds fifth team:
We had five teams. I started in the Altrincham League playing
against local teams. We were winning by eighteen to twenty
goals a game. This was where the brilliance could be expressed
without fear of losing. That was important, a way of gaining
confidence, of exploring the limits of your talent. I was scoring
regularly but I couldnt get into the fourth team, Charlton
explains. They seemed to have a set pattern or time-scale. You
wouldnt progress until a certain amount of time was spent in
the Altrincham League. Then you moved on. Real progress
was getting to the A team, that was the third team. They
played in the Manchester Amateur League. You were sixteen
and this was open-age football with big dockers and guys from
factory teams kicking lumps out of you. But it was another
fantastic education.
Getting into the FA Youth Cup team was the ultimate.
Playing at Old Trafford instead of park pitches, the buzz of the
crowd. Charlton shivers at the wonder of those Youth Cup
games. Jimmy created an atmosphere before those games.
They were a matter of life and death. He and Bert would always
say,  The Boss is coming. Matt Busby, he was like a god.
Youd be conscious of him sitting in the stand, you wanted to
show him how good you were.
Busby had the same electric effect when he appeared during
training, as Wilf McGuinness recalls: Bert Whalley and Jimmy
would supervise the training. Then when the five-a-side started
 it was actually 20-a-side most mornings  Matt Busby would
appear. As soon as he came out there was a feeling about the
place. Some people would mess in the five-a-sides, but there
189
was no standing about when the Boss appeared. It was like a
bloody Cup Final. Everybody wanted the ball, they wanted to
show him what they could do. Thats how it was with me and all
the others: Duncan, Eddie, Bobby, no matter who you were,
first team or not you wanted to show him. Wheres that ball, let
me geta tackle in, let me do something good, and all of a sudden
you were ten feet tall.
This was Matt Busbys reality in the years 53/54/55.
Outside, the Great Debate progressed without him. Those
seeking a cure for the ills of the English game would surely not
have approved had they glimpsed the daily routine at Man-
chester United. The young players with jobs trained at the Cliff
on Tuesday and Thursday nights, the full-timers at Old
Trafford, every day of the working week. Bobby Charlton, Wilf
McGuinness, Jackie Blanchflower, Duncan Edwards, David
Pegg, Mark Jones, Billy Whelan, all experienced life as vividly
described by McGuinness: I worked for Richardsons Textiles
in Manchester for my first year. I trained at the Cliff. It was
beautiful, looking back, bloody awful at the time. The flood-
lights were dreadful, you could hardly see. The training kit was
the worst imaginable. It was never washed, no one knows what
disease could have spread all over the place. When you arrived
you just grabbed what you could from the table. Those big
heavy woollen sweaters, and the shoes we trained in ; big heavy
things, you thought, how can I play in these. But it must have
helped.
Afterwards youd get in the bath  forty of you  it was black
within two minutes. When you got out youd have to have a cold
shower to get the muck off. Manys the time I remember
standing there shivering, looking for a towel, practically in tears
after a bollocking Jimmy had given me. He seemed to pick on
me. I was cocky. I was his type of player  a battler  and hed
give me the sugar as well. But there was plenty of bollockings.
Hed make me want to come back and prove him wrong when
he questioned my attitude. He helped me tremendously,
without Jimmy I wouldnt have been a player.
When he turned pro Wilf tasted life in the big-time at Old
Trafford: On Tuesdays wed have the practice match and that
190
was for real. The other mornings youd run the track, a few laps
to loosen up, then ten sides of the pitch, a few sprints, a bit of
gym work - or straight round the back for the game.
We used to play on the car-park, which was half cinders, half
tar, McGuinness recalls. There was a thick wooden fence
along the railway where the crowd used to queue on match
days. The concrete wall of the stand was on the other side.
When you were playing you had to look out for yourself.
You'd have to duck under a player against the fence or the wall.
If you didnt youd get hit. You might think it wasnt conducive
to good football, but you had to think quick and be tricky. If
The Boss or Jimmy werent there, Bert, Tosher Curry or Bill
Inglis would supervise. Bert was the gentler of the coaches. He
would put his arm round you and have a bit of a chat. He was
North Manchester, Bert. He was a gentleman, a lovely man,
hard-working. They all fitted in: Bert, Tosher, Bill and little old
Arthur Powell who we used to take the mickey out of a lot. He
was part of it, not just football people as such, we had nice
people who looked after you. We didnt have Hammerers
lower down.
The games, twenty-a-side, were epics. In essence the impro-
vised football of childhood on the streets recreated in the
shadow of the Old Trafford Grandstand. The School of
Football Excellence Manchester circa 1950-8.
Only the strong survived. Talent got you into this academy
but you needed character to graduate, and every day your spirit
was exposed and tested in one way or another. The Cliff, with
its muck, dodgy floodlights, cold showers and bollockings, was
not for faint hearts or tender egos. There were dozens of
youngsters fighting for recognition, among them some of the
toughest and most gifted in Britain. Then when you progressed
to the cinders and tar beneath the Old Trafford Grandstand life
was even harder. Matt Busby had broken down many of the
barriers between the first team and the others, so on the
- pulsating stretch of ground between wooden railway fence and
concrete Grandstand wall the youngest pro mixed it with
renowned internationals. No concessions were made in these
glorified street games. You made or broke. If you looked like
191
(

making, Jimmy would have you back in the afternoon. Bert
would put his arm around you if you looked like breaking.
There was no soft option.
corse
a
Pet
.

11
Red Devils
It was an intimidating atmosphere at
Old Trafford in those days. There
were so many great young players
desperate to get in the side.
John Giles

For two years Matt Busby was patient. There was no dramatic
transition from old to new. In October 53 Duncan Edwards
established himself in the first team when Henry Cockburn
broke his jaw in a floodlight game in Kilmarnock. Edwards was
the exception to every rule. Jackie Blanchflower and Denis
Viollet came into the side at the same time. Jeff Whitefoot was
now also a regular. Tommy Taylor was proving to be worth the
30,000 he cost. Bill Foulkes was in at right-back, straight from
the pits at St Helens where he worked until he was twenty. Don
Gibson and David Pegg played occasionally.
Chilton hung on, playing every game that season. Mark
Jones was waiting in the reserves. Jack Rowley wasnt ready to
quit. Competition was fierce now at all levels of the club.
Potentially great players were grateful to get into the reserves.
Wolves won the Championship. The Great Debate went on.
The following season Chelsea won the title with fifty-two
points, the lowest total in history. The FA Year Book for 1953
carried an article headlined HAS FLOODLIGHT FOOTBALL GOT A
FUTURE? The sceptical conclusion was that this gadget prob-
ably didnt have anything to offer the best game in the world.
Meanwhile, the radical Arthur Rowe had sunk without trace to
manage Crystal Palace in Division Three South.
While the first team stayed respectably on the fringes of the
Championship contest, Uniteds reserve and youth sides were
winning everything by incredible scores. Ten to fifteen
193
thousand attended reserve games at Old Trafford. The figure |
was higher for the FA Youth Cup. The youngsters were
growing up spectacularly, their hierarchy reflected in Mrs
Watsons lodging house. Jackie Blanchflower, Tommy Taylor
and Mark Jones were the leaders. A couple of years older, with
first team experience under their belt, Jackie, Mark and
Tommy presided at meal times and organised the entertain-
ment. Bobby Charlton, for one, appreciated this system: It was
a godsend. We all knocked around together. Mark was the
father figure. He smoked a pipe and had asort of presence. To
us he was an old man  he was only 22. He was just old
fashioned. The pictures were our favourite entertainment.
Mark, 'Jackie or Tommy would pick up the evening paper and
say, Theres a good film on at the Gaiety or the Theatre
Royal, and we would all say, Right lets go. Wed get the
tram into town and we would all walk back together after-
wards.
Gordon Clayton explains the routine: Sometimes wed go to
a dance, but mostly it was the pictures to begin with. We never
went out after Wednesday except to the cinema. Friday night
was Picture Night every week. Wed either go to the Trafford or
Town. We had free passes for the Trafford and the Gaiety and
the Oxford in town. Mark was the Guvnor. He was a big
Barnsley Chop, a lovely man. I can see it now. Swing those
arms, hed say. On Friday nights we got back to the digs about
half-ten or a quarter-to-eleven and there would be the corn-
flakes and milk on the table and wed have them and then away
to bed.
Clayton and Duncan remained close. We stuck together,
Gordon confirms. Duncan was a little bit introverted when he
came to Manchester first. With being a big lad hed got this
reputation where we came from of being a bully. But he wasnt.
The only thing he wanted to do was play football. He wasnt
interested in anything else. He wouldnt go to the bank on his
own, for example. He hated filling in forms and stuff. Even at
that age Duncan wasnt interested in the material things of life.
Duncan had a mind of his own. He wasnt a mixer as such.
He was shy with people. The pictures was the one thing he
194
loved, especially after he got in the first team and became well
known. Hed go straight from one picture-house to the next.
Couldnt get enough of films.
Wilf McGuiness describes Edwards as a big softie . . . but
this was off the field. He was a nice lad, Duncan, talked with this
great Brummie accent. You will hear all sorts of stories about
how great he was on the field and to us players he was that great.
A big giant, he was. In training we would start off jogging, and
chatting. Duncan would come out with his polo-neck sweater,
big woolly sweater, shorts, no tracksuit bottoms, even on the
coldest morning, and those big thighs. I can picture him now,
just running flat out, not on the track like us, he went round the
grass. Hed start by pounding out 10 laps and that was for
warm-ups. He was powerful and hed let us know. Duncan was
something exceptional.
Duncan knew he was the best player, Bobby Charlton
confirms, but off the field he could be fun, although he palled
with Big Gordon and went his own way in lots of ways. Even
when we got older he didnt drink. It was always football, what
was best for his football. He lived for that.
As they got older they explored the more exotic delights of
Manchester life. The Locarno Ballroom in Sale was a favourite
Saturday night venue. Some were in the first team, Duncan,
Tommy Taylor, maybe David Pegg and Jackie Blanchflower;
me, Eddie and Wilf would be in the reserves, but wed all meet
up on Saturday nights, Bobby recalls. If I was in the reserves
and they were playing at Villa Park or West Brom Id wait at the
Bridge Inn near Sale until about nine oclock. Theyd come
back and wed go to the Locarno.
Town was the alternative, Wilf McGuinness explains: There
were lots of places in town. Wed have our fads. The Plaza at
lunchtimes  it was sixpence to get in  that was one. And of
course on Saturday nights the Plaza was one of the places.
Jimmy Saville was the assistant-manager. The Cafe Royal
opposite the Midland Hotel was a restaurant, but we went to
the bar downstairs. We had lager and lime, big drinkers.
Double Century Ale was another drink we used to have. There
was the Sportsmans in Market Street, that was a pub; the
Bodega was a jazz club we used to go into and the Zanzibar was
195
a little coffee-bar. Jackie and Tommy were older. Wed be on
the last bus  none of us had cars in those days  and wed see
Jackie and Tommy staggering about well gone.
Jackie Blanchflower and Tommy Taylor became close
friends. Mark Jones would go home to his sweetheart, June, in
Barnsley every weekend. Jackie and Tommy would hit town.
Tommy and I were pals for five years. I cant explain it to
you. We had similar interests, a bet, the dogs, a few bevvies,
Jack reminisces. On Saturday night we might go to the dogs at
Belle Vue, or for a Chinese, then go and have a few drinks in the
Continental Club or somewhere. The Continental was a night-
club, with cabaret, dark, always packed. Sometimes wed go to
the Ritz off Oxford Road. Eric Morley was assistant-manager
there. Jimmy Saville would come over from the Plaza. Some-
times Bobby and Duncan would come, but they werent old
enough to have a drink.
Paddy McGrath had moved back to Manchester in 1954 to
open the Cromford Club. This was a classy place, Wilf explains:
Paddys club was respectable, it was always the sportsmans
club. You could get a meal and a drink. The Cromford was big-
time.
Eddie Colman loved the Cromford once he started courting
Marjorie. Everyone loved little Eddie. We used to go to town
together before he met Marjorie, Wilf recalls. I never met
anybody with as much personality as Eddie. He just bubbled, I
loved him, we all did. Me, him, Bobby and Shay Brennan, who
was another Manchester lad, would go to our house on Friday
after training. Sometimes Gordon and Duncan would come.
Friday was fish day. My father got the fish cheap in the Market
and my mum would give me a few coppers to run down the
chip-shop for chips. We'd all have our fishnchips and then go
to the pictures in town.
Sometimes we'd start off at Eddies house on a Saturday.
Number 9 Archie Street, Salford. Coronation Street is based on
Archie Street, but they didnt have a pub. There was alittle
off-licence at the corner. We used to sit in the parlour with
Elizabeth, his mum, and Dick, his dad, and theyd send down
for a jug of beer. We would have shandies. It was our first taste
of beer really.
196
David Pegg would be there as well. He and Bobby were big
pals. David was a ladies man, Wilf explains, a good looking
lad with Victor Mature eyes, a right Yorkshire lad, confident.
Today, thirty-five years later, Bobby Charlton, one of the
most eminent and respected men ever to emerge from British
sport, speaks in wonder of those evenings, those times, the lads
he grew up with: It was paradise just before the first team
started to win the title. Eddie was the angel in this heaven.
Cheeky and streetwise, nothing impressed or bothered him. He
hadnt played for England Boys, so what? I remember when
we started some great England schoolboy came  it could have
been Duncan, Bobby smiles, and Eddie pulled him right down
to size. Tackled him, got the ball, sold him a dummy,
nutmegged him, so that was the message. Hed strut, always
laughing, always cool. A Salford lad.
I had come from the North East which was, I suppose, a bit
parochial and Eddie was the flash little townie. He was the first
person I ever saw in drainpipe trousers. But he was brilliant. I was
very close to Eddie, of course we were all close at that time. Wed
go to Wilfs or Eddies. I think the parents were frightened we
werent getting fed properly in the digs. At holiday times Id
always stay at Eddies in Archie Street. Christmas Id always be
invited. Wed play on Christmas morning, then go back to his
place for the turkey. His family were nice. His mum wasalittle fat
woman, Elizabeth. His dad was a working lad. It was a tiny little
street, a fabulous community spirit. We have it in the North East,
but not like round there.
If we played in the reserves on Christmas morning it was
usually at Bury, Bolton or Rochdale, somewhere local. Wed
have our dinner and then every house in the street would have
the doors open. People would be in and out, down to the off-
licence for jugs of beer, a real party. Eddie would say, Youve
got to hear my Uncle Billy singing, he wants to give you a song,
hes the best singer in the world. So Uncle Billy would sing, it
was hilarious and non-stop. Wed have a match the next day, so
wed try to get to bed at twelve oclock. But it was impossible to
sleep. Someone was always coming up the stairs saying,
Grandads here, or whoever. There were some amazing
characters in the house.
197
Eddies grandad was about four foot eleven. He lived two
streets up, he had a little bushy moustache and he was always
talking about the First World War. He had alittle voice, The
lads I fought with, Bobby, were the bravest lads youve ever
seen. I remember marching past the Corn Exchange after the
war and Lord Kitchener was there taking the salute. And I just
happened to hear him say, Bigger men I may have seen, but
smarter men I have never seen.  Hed tell us stories about the
war, all kinds of daft things, but he was funny. It was wonderful.
Eddie was a complete original. It ran in the family.
Wherever Eddie was there was fun, it shone out of him, Wilf
McGuiness confirms. His character was formed by hard times,
for Salford had suffered brutally during the depression of the
late Twenties and early Thirties. His father, Dick, was un-
employed for five years. Dick could play ball. In 1933 he scored
a hat-trick to help Ordsall Centre to victory in the Salford
Unemployed Cup Final at Old Trafford. The prize was a pair of
heavy working boots and a new suit for scoring three goals.
Dick pawned the suit for 1. Eddie was a villain growing up, a
real one, Dick would later assert, but football made him
blossom into a lovable rogue. Hed wear a cloth-cap and striped
college scarf to training. Drainpipes and the latest gear to the
Locarno or Town. He was the same lad, even when he made
the First Team.
Duncan changed. He was a shade more introverted, Gordon
thinks: He never really enjoyed a big group. Hed go to the
Locarno but he wouldnt dance. He wasnt one for the birds.
He had a dabble here and there like the rest of us but he was
very shy with girls. At the Locarno Duncan would be on the
edge, just standing there looking.
One night Gordon and Duncan went to the Derby Street Ice
House, a skating rink. There Duncan sawagirl called Molly.
She was his first love, Gordon says. He was a strong character
and as soon as he set eyes on her you knew that was it. Molly
was a nice girl, very nice, a bit up-market for us. Not what you
might call a footballers girl.
Duncan didnt hesitate: There was no sophistication, he just
went over and started talking to her. I dont think she was too
keen at first. But she was the best thing that could have
198
), Captain of Scotland

er United.
2 Sergeant Major Busby signs on as manager of Manchest
bears witness.
Club Secretary Walter Crickmer, later to die at Munich,
3 First division champions at last in 1952. Johnny Carey (second from left
front row), Henry Cockburn to his skipper's left, Matt Busby (extreme left,
standing), Tom Curry (extreme right), Harold Hardman beside Busby.

4 Hollywood with Bob Hope (without blazer) during the US Tour 1952,
Roger Byrne (three from right, kneeling), Mark Jones with hands on the
boss's shoulder. Johnny Aston immediately to Hope's left.
5 F. A. Youth Cup
Winners 1954/5, Eddie
Colman holds the trophy,
Wilf McGuinness and
Bobby Charlton to his
left. Duncan Edwards
standing apart, back left.

6 Best friends. Wilf,
Bobby and Shay Brennan
with friend. Young,
handsome and gifted,
Manchester 1955.
7 Mutual admiration. Bobby Charlton in possession while Tommy Taylor (centre)
and Denis Viollet await developments. Denis as usual looks favourite.

8 Matt Busby, contented, poses with the greatest squad of players ever assembled
in one British club. Eddie Colman and David Pegg share a joke, left, Roger Byrne |
Jeans nonchalantly on the rail, eee Whalley, blazered, on Roger's left.
Sl

The Red Devils in 1957 with the championship trophy they have retained. Johnny
erry helps Roger Byrne display the prize. Standing (from left) Denis Viollet,
lommy Taylor, Byrne, Berry, Mark Jones and Geoff Bent. In front, Duncan Edwards,
ienny Morgans, Ray Wood, David Pegg and Eddie Colman tongue in cheek.
a Bagedy at Munich.
12 Jimmy Murphy
preaching to Bobby.
Wilf looks on.

13 A long way from
Orbiston. The real man
with his best friend.
14 The football
man, his European
dream fulfilled.

15 The class of
1968. Jack Crompton
in track-suit (centre
night). Joe Armstrong
beside him.
16 above Sir Matt bids farewell.
Old Trafford 1969.

17 below Champagne Louis.

18 right Wilf McGuinness sees
the writing on the wall.
19 George.
20 Georgie.
21 Frank O'Farrell with Sir Matt. Uneasy companions.

22 Forbidden love. Tommy Docherty and Mary Brown.
happened to him. He was famous, it was difficult to go out. Now
he could go round to Mollys and sit with her. Thats what he
loved to do.
Duncan and Molly would go to the pictures or play records in
the evening. He became an England player very quickly,
became more self-assured in public, got a bit of dress sense. But
he never changed with me, Gordon adds, he was a good
friend, there was nothing he wouldnt do for you. He grew up,
we all do, but it was a gradual process.
Trouble was brewing at Mrs Watsons during Christmas week
1954. Mrs Watson had caught her husband, Albert, in bed with
one of the maids. He was in the doghouse. A keen card school
had formed among the United lodgers and Jackie Blanch-
flower, Tommy Taylor and Billy Whelan were among a group
of the players staying up half the night playing poker. Matters
came to a head on Christmas Day. The boys were late home
from their match to find the table was set as usual, but with
Spam instead of turkey on the menu. The food was normally
good, Gordon Clayton declares, but that was the limit. Jackie
called a meeting. We couldnt put up with this. We were
Manchester United players, the Busby Babes having Spam for
Christmas Day! Old Albert was sixty-five, it was his fault
really.
By the end of the season this branch of paradise was closed.
They moved out to separate houses: Gordon with Duncan,
Bobby with David Pegg, Tommy and Jackie. Mark Jones was
marrying June. He was all right.
In April 1955 the French daily sports newspaper LEquipe
convened a meeting of sixteen top European clubs to discuss
the idea of a champions cup. Asaresult of that gathering at
which Chelsea, Englands champions-elect were represented,
the European Cup was born. The first draw took place the
following August. Chelsea were not, however, among the clubs
participating. Although willing, the London club had been
advised by the Football League that what was deemed to be yet
another new gadget would interfere with their domestic
commitments. Elitism, the coming together of the best clubs
and the best players, remained the appalling vista it had been
fifty years before and ever since. The best League in the world
199
had no need of a European Cup. Football was about Aldershot ;
as much as Chelsea.
In Manchester, Matt Busby continued to proceed with
prudence. The departure of Chilton, Henry Cockburn, Stan
Pearson and Jack Rowley meant the transformation from the
old to new was finally complete. Roger Byrne, the new club
captain and England left-back, was maturing into one of the
great defenders of all time. He was quick and clever. Roger
wasnt a tackler, he simply couldnt be passed. He was
everything the old full-backs had not been. He dispossessed
clinically, timing rather than lunging was the essence. Going
forward, he was as effective as most wingers. Defence, as
practised by Byrne, was cerebral, a matter of concentration,
reading the danger and moving swiftly to cut it out before any
threat developed. Mentally he was hard; physically lithe.
Like Johnny Carey, the symbol of gracious thoughtfulness,
Gentleman Johnny, Byrne projected a certain sense of
Manchester United. The new mood was different. As embodied
by its new captain, Busbys club had a bit of a swagger, more than
a hint of disdain, was more powerful than gracious, possessed the
arrogance of the new generation, convinced that it had found a
better way  of playing left-back, of living, of expressing itself.
Something was happening to England, to the world outside.
Youth was beginning to assert itself, old values were being
rejected, respect for the past was no longer automatic.
Bill Haleys rocknroll was the first hint of rebellion.
Throughout Britain theatres had their seats ripped out as
youngsters gyrated to the sound of Haley and his Comets.
Teddy-boys with carefully coiffed hair, wore velvet collars on
the long draped jackets, bootlace ties, drainpipe trousers and
crepe-soled shoes. They were angry and menacing. James
Dean, Elvis Presley, Little Richard and Jerry Lee Lewis were
other harbingers of a New Age, more threatening than Haley
and the Comets who were soon to be dismissed as too tame.
In Liverpool John Lennon was at Art College. For now,
rebellion was an imported product, America the source. But it
was on the way. Soon popular culture in Britain would reflect
the anger of the playwright, John Osborne, who damned
England for its stultifying post-war conservatism.
200
The Fifties were a time of austerity, of punative conventions,
of a grey uniformity, the Bohemian George Melly has written.
Manchester, living up to its proudest tradition, was about to
change all that. The worlds first great industrial city was fond of
declaring: What Manchester does today the world does
tomorrow. By times a seemingly idle boast, this claim was
about to be rendered credible again through the unlikely
medium of professional soccer. Although, remembering Billy
Meredith, Ernest Mangnall and J. H. Davis, and footballs
inspiring contribution to this extraordinary citys sense of itself,
the events of the next three years were not all that surprising.
Roger Byrne would not have approved of Teddy-boys and
the destruction of cinemas. He did, though, make a similar kind
of statement whenever he faced Stan Matthews and Tom
Finney, the legends of post-war professional soccer. The
Matthews Cup Final of 1953 engraved the Blackpool wingers
name on Englands contemporary roll of honour. Gordon
Richards won the Derby that same summer. In 1953,
Coronation Year, a British Expedition led by John Hunt
conquered Everest. Roger Bannister broke the four-minute-
mile barrier in 1954. Sportsmen were the heroes of the age.
Matthews, Finney, Richards, Bannister, Hunt; all were of a
certain type, conventional English heroes, modest, self-
deprecating, suburban heroes with whom the mums and dads
could identify.
Byrne versus Matthews or Finney was a sign of changing
times. In 53, 54 and 55 Roger faced the great men. And every
time-he stalked them down: as quick as they were, as confident,
as smart or, his gait suggested, smarter. Watching in the stand,
Busby understood. He had found his new leader. Theirs had
not been a cosy relationship. Byrne was not Carey.
Roger was a cantankerous type at times, Jackie Blanch-
flower says. He was stubborn, his own man, who did things his
own way. Hed stand up to Matt in training. One day they had a
row at the ground. Matt was insisting on something Roger
' disagreed with and Roger swiped the ball out of the Bosss
hands to make his own point. But he was a hell of a player, the
fastest thing wed ever seen.
Roger Byrne was something like I imagine a cricket captain
201
to be, Wilf McGuinness explains, he was a bit aloof from the
rest of us. He had gone to night school to qualify as a
physiotherapist; he was more intelligent, if you like, than us.
We were silly at times, we were only growing up; he had grown
up. Roger was an adult, we were only young lads, babes, the
Busby Babes. That phrase began to enter the language in 1955,
inspired first by the FA Youth Cup teams achievements. Roger
Byrne was not a Babe.
Wilf made his debut early-in the 55/56 season. He was
seventeen, still a youth player, still cocky. Byrne put him in his
place one day. He could be fiery on and off the field, Wilf
allows. We were playing somewhere just after I got in the side.
We were in the hotel before the game and there was a spare
chair in this room we were in. It was Rogers, but hed left the
room and I didnt know, so I sat down. When he came back he
said, Up you get. He was captain but I thought, No way,
you can get lost. I thought he was just pulling rank and I was
going to get a bit aggressive about it. He clouted me round the
ears, then I got a nudge from the side which explained the
situation. I felt as though Id been a bit of an idiot by not getting
up.
For all its essential decency there was a pecking order in the
Old Trafford dressing-room. The Home team room was for
senior first team players. The Away dressing-room for young-
sters, however brilliant. You knocked on the door if you
wanted to go in there, Wilf recalls. We, myself, Eddie, Bobby
were in the reserve room, we were the lads still.
Manchester United were not expected to challenge for the
First Division title at the beginning of the 55/56 season  they
had too many youngsters  but everyone knew they were an
exciting prospect for the future. When they won only three of
their first eight games, speculation about the lack of experience
in the side seemed correct. By late October they were top of the
table.
Tommy Taylor had missed six of the first seven games
through injury. Duncan Edwards also missed half-a-dozen
early games. Once they were fit, United began to soar. Little
Eddie made his debut at Bolton in November. The following
Saturday United welcomed reigning champions Chelsea to Old
202
wees
re

_ Trafford. Tommy Taylor scored twice, Roger Byrne once in a
comfortable 30 victory. Suddenly the English game had
- changed. The dark night of stagnation was over. Matt Busbys
Manchester United was about to make its contribution to the
Great Debate. :
Losing only once between New Years Day and the seasons
end, United won the Championship by eleven points. On 7
April a post-war record crowd of 62,277 packed Old Trafford to
watch Busbys team formally claim the title by beating
Blackpool 21. Only 22,000 had attended the Chelsea game a
few short months previously. Fans and sportswriters alike had
been unprepared for the revolution. There was no slow dawn to
this new age, instead a dazzling explosion of light and energy |
which took the breath away.
No seats were ripped out, but grey uniformity was swept
away, and Englands football past was damned with more
daring certainty than even Osborne could have wished for.
The new champions were called the Red Devils. It was an
apt description, for their vivacious roguishness was one of their
most attractive qualities. Denis Viollet who scored twenty goals
that season brought another distinctly Manchester dimension
to the side. Denis was a devil, a rogue, smooth, elegant and
sophisticated, as were the Manchester nightclubs he loved to
frequent. Denis was a Manchester lad to his marrow. Not for
him the coffee-bars or Ice Rinks or the innocent cavorting of
Sale Locarno. The Cromford Club, perhaps, preferably the
velvet promise of the Queens and Continental Clubs where the
real action was. He was a loner. Liked by the lads and liking
them, but to them he was elusive, mysterious, Town, after the
last bus had long since gone. And thats the way he played his
football, beautifully balanced, subtle, a gliding, powerful
presence, composed and deadly when the opening came. David
Pegg was Manchester too, sharp, brazen, young and handsome.
A lad.
Devils, yes, powerful ones. Duncan Edwards dominating
everything around him, physically, spiritually, a force of
extraordinary impact. So hungry for the ball that sometimes, as
Jackie Blanchflower recalls, he would brush you aside to get
possession. Duncan broke up attacks with ruthless authority,
203
the diffidence of dance-hall and bank-counter transformed into ;
imperious conviction. When a goal was needed, a defeat 
looming, other spirits beginning to tire, his was the galvanising
extra drive that turned the issue in their favour. The others were
in awe of him, all except little Eddie, the Salford urchin who
wasnt in awe of anyone.
Tommy Taylor scored twenty-five goals that year, leading the
forward line with lusty vigour and delicate touch. His pal,
Jackie Blanchflower, added another virtue to the whole, poise
and intelligence, wry Manchester humour. A team of many
talents for a city of many faces, a city made up of outsiders. A
city where rogue and priest could sit together with rabbi and
inventor, each feeling they belonged as truly as Beckett,
Barbirolli and Alex Bird. Cottonopolis. Here the first Catholic
church bells rang after the Reformation; here, half-a-mile from
Old Trafford, on Stretford Road, the illiterate Polish Jew,
Michael Marks, joined Tom Spencer to open their first Penny
Bazaar in 1894. Men of many kinds dared to dream.
Matt Busby had dreamed long and quietly. As he sat in the
stand watching his Red Devils he experienced something
much more profound than professional pride. He thought of
Alex James, of the glorious vision of his bleak childhood, the
light that first entered his soul beneath the pit-head bing in Old
Orbiston. Matt didnt think of that so much as sense the old
magic of the past surging through his blood. The feeling of
fulfilment was chilling.
Matt hadnt expected this so soon. He was pleased and alittle
frightened. Theyd won the Championship by eleven points.
Their average age was twenty-two.
Busby knew there was more to come. United won the FA
Youth Cup for the third year running in 1956. McGuinness,
Charlton, Alex Dawson, Mark Pearson and Kenny Morgans
played in the side that beat Chesterfield in the Final. They
looked as good as their predecessors. McGuinness had already
made his first team debut. Bobby Charlton had almost got in at
Easter. He looked an unbelievable prospect.
Reflecting on that time, Bobby outlines his fears: I was
scoring goals and everybody kept saying you'll be in the first
team soon. But I looked at them and I thought, How am I
204
going to get in? I was an attacking inside or centre-forward.
And we had Tommy Taylor, Denis Viollet, Billy Whelan, John
Doherty, Colin Webster. Ill never forget the Easter they won
the first Championship. Id been playing well and scoring goals,
so I thought with three games over Easter somebodys bound to
get injured and Ill get my chance. They went to Newcastle on
Easter Monday and drew 0-0. Id played in the reserves at
West Brom on the Saturday and scored five or six goals ina 9-1
win. The next Friday I was waiting for the team-sheet to go up
thinking, This is it, but the Boss kept the same team.
When Busby, Jimmy Murphy and Bert Whalley assessed
their incredible riches that summer the biggest problem they
seemed to face was keeping restless players worthy of First
Division football happy in the reserves. Almost every position
was up for grabs. Thinking about how good this side, which had
finished eleven points clear of the rest, might become when the
average age was twenty-five, Busby and his staff were left
speechless.
The Football League tried to intimidate Manchester United out
of entering the European Champions Cup. They were reminded
of their first duty  to the Football League  and warned that no
excuses could be accepted if this gimmick called the Champions
Cup caused any disruption to their First Division programme. The
League was politely but firmly rebuffed.
Busby had no difficulty persuading his Board that Europe
was a wise option. By now he dominated board meetings
although the protocol insisted that he sat in only to advise. Alan
Gibson obeyed his fathers wish and voted with Mr Busby. The
chairman, Harold Hardman, was aflinty little man, Man-
chesters rigorous English Masonic face, and he and Busby
were respectful rather than fond of each other. Hardman did
not approve of the characters his manager socialised with, but
he did approve of the football club of which he found himself
the titular head. He remembered the bad old days and
continued to watch the pennies, but as he wryly remarked, Our
- manager advises us and then tells us what to do. The quote is
apocryphal yet an accurate reflection of Busbys unique in-
fluence. No other manager before or since ever wielded the
power Matt Busby did at Old Trafford.
205
His rationale for engaging in European competition was
threefold. First it would provide money to pay for the flood-
lights United had still to install, and for the large, ever-
expanding wage bill rising in proportion to the number of First
Division quality players on Uniteds books. Second, the extra
competition, seen as a problem by the Football League, was a
blessing to Busby  players could be kept happy and gain
experience playing in the Champions Cup. His final reason was
more abstract than practical. He understood how irrevocably
the balance of power was shifting away from the English game,
and saw that football in the future would be an international
game. The world was contracting, travel was easier, people
were curious about abroad. As a football man he was intrigued
by the international game. Football as played by the
Hungarians was his kind of game.
Billy Whelan beat Bobby Charlton into the first team.
Whelan started the 56/57 season at inside-right in a side that
began the defence of its title confidently by running up a
sequence of twelve games without defeat. Bobby Charlton was
desperate. At the end of September Edwards and Taylor were
injured during an away victory at Highbury.
I always remember that week, Charlton declares. Three
weeks before, I'd been injured at Maine Road in a reserve
match. I twisted the ligaments in my right ankle its still bigger
now. It took me two weeks to start running again. The week the
lads got injured the Boss says, Hows your ankle? And I
knew this was my chance. SoI said fine. It was sore as hell, not
when I ran, but when I turned on it or tried to kick the ball. But I
knew I had to get in. I was desperate. I played against Charlton
at home, and scored two goals. I never kicked the ball with my
right foot all day.
That level of enthusiasm existed throughout the club. I was
left out again when Tommy was fit, Bobby recalls, but I got
fourteen games that season which meant I got a blazer. You had
to play fourteen games to get a blazer.
Charlton, desperately worried about his future, was
eighteen. He scored consistently whenever he played, including
a hat-trick in the return fixture with Charlton at The Valley.
Bobby was the young player with everything: power, wonder-
206
fully fluid movement and two great feet. He could score goals
and link up in general play to devastating effect. His long
gloriously flighted passes raked holes in the opposition defence.
He could shimmy past defenders and once away was uncatch-
able. Bobby Charlton was a sensation. And he could hardly get
a game.
John Giles had arrived at Old Trafford. John was, in Billy
Behans opinion, the best schoolboy footballer he had ever
seen. A stocky, well-built little Dubliner, Giles was beautifully
balanced, had two good feet and remarkable vision. From a
renowned Irish football family, Giles was also. impressively
self-possessed for a youngster. Watching Bobby Charlton play
for Uniteds reserves caused Giles to doubt himself. Id never
seen anything like him, John says. I remember sitting in the
stand at Old Trafford one night watching the reserves with my
dad. I dont know who they were playing, but they won
something like eight or nine nil. Bobby scored five. Id never
had the slightest doubt that Id be a player, but I turned to my
Dad and said, I dont know about this. 
Dickie Giles, a great old football man himself, offered his son
reassurance. It was badly needed. Bobby was unbelievable,
even in training. It was an intimidating atmosphere at Old
Trafford at that time. There were so many great young players
desperate to get in the side.
The team matured as expected. Confidence now infused all
the other qualities. Wherever they played attendances were
inflated. This was particularly true of London. A crowd of
62,000 saw United win at Highbury; 57,000 turned up for the
Spurs fixture at White Hart Lane. There was never any doubt
that the Championship would be retained. Everywhere they
played they attacked. They loved the applause: Colman,
Byrne, Taylor and Viollet responding with deft little improvisa-
tions. There was something inspiringly joyous about this team.
They were exhilarating, carefree, unconventional. And British,
not Hungarian. Of this Britishness  or more accurately
Englishness  the intimidating competitiveness of Duncan
Edwards was a perpetual reminder. He didnt play to the
crowd. He hardly seemed to notice.
207
By early 57 they were clear at the top of the Division. When :
they claimed the title they were eight points clear of Spurs their 
nearest rivals.
A legend was building around this astonishing young team. A
popular songwriter penned the Manchester United Calypso in
the idiom of the time:

If theyre playing in your town
Be sure to get to that football ground
If you do, then you will see
Football taught by Matt Busby
At Manchester . . . Manchester United
A bunch of bouncing Busby Babes,
They deserve to be knighted.

Busby was prepared to settle for the First Division/FA Cup
Double never achieved in modern times.
Europe was another target. United slaughtered the Belgian
champions Anderlecht in their preliminary round tie. Duncan
Edwards, like Colman and Charlton, still doing National
Service, was unavailable for the first leg in Brussels. Floodlit
football was still a rare gadget in England. This was Uniteds
first competitive floodlit match. Busby advised them to keep the
ball on the deck. He hadnt had time to watch Anderlecht, so he
told the players not to mind reputations  the opposition had six
Belgian internationals  and play their own game. This was
good enough for a 2-0 victory.
European football did not excite public imagination in
England, and the national press devoted little space to this
initial engagement. The return leg in Manchester was played
under Citys lights at Maine Road. United won 10-0. Denis
Viollet scored four goals, Tommy Taylor was second best with a
hat-trick, and Billy Whelan scored two. Forty-four thousand
Mancunians attended. The story made the headlines. Some
cavilled that it was only Anderlecht. The Belgians captain,
Mermans, offered a sobering perspective for the sceptics: The
best teams of Hungary have never beaten us like this. They are
fantastic. Reminding the jounalists that Anderlecht had
recently beaten Arsenal, Mermans concluded, They should
pick this whole team for England.
208
It is fascinating to note that Billy Whelan was the only non-
English player in Uniteds side that night. Bobby Charlton
would have made a good substitute were England inclined to
heed Mermanss advice. In this context the Englishness of
Busbys great team is remarkable. Most great Football League
teams had had a couple of Scots in key positions. Busby had
none. The Welshman Kenny Morgans would emerge within a
year to contest a first team place, Jackie Blanchflower was a
regular deputy for the wounded in midfield or at centre-half but
the team now writing its legend was distinctly English in nature.
Ironically the city that now adored them was the least English of
all the cities in the land.
United beat Borussia Dortmund 3-2 in the first leg of the
next round. Seventy-five thousand spectators saw the game at
Maine Road  the gimmick was catching on. Swagger cost
United dear when, after leading 30 they allowed the Germans
two late goals. They battled to secure a 00 draw in Dortmund.
Honved, the powerful Hungarian club side containing five of
the national team, were presumed to be Uniteds next
opponents. The Hungarians had defected en masse before
Budapests 56 Uprising, so Honved were forced to play their
home leg of this tie in Brussels where Bilbao of Spain beat
Puskas and his team 65 on aggregate.
Bilbao, beaten only once at home in three seasons, won the
first leg 5-3. Northern Spain was a tough spot in January, and
the trip over was a nightmare, snow rendering Bilbao airport
treacherous and deserted when United arrived. The journey
home, which began with players and officials helping to wipe
snow off the wings of the plane, was warmed by thoughts of a
magnificent goal Billy Whelan had scored late in the game to
give United a chance in the return leg. Trailing 52 the cause
looked hopeless, until Duncan broke up a Bilbao attack, found
Whelan wide on the right and the tall Irishman ran zealously at
the Spanish defenders before striking the ball to the far corner
~ of the net with wicked power. This valiant final flourish was a
mark of the courage which underpinned all else that was
splendid in Busbys team.
On 6 February 1957 Bilbao came to Manchester. The city was
209
intoxicated. Seventy thousand went to the game at Maine
Road. The whole city felt a rare enchantment. Those early
European nights in Manchester were almost indescribably
glamorous. It was as if the lights that lit Maine Road had cast
their glow on everyone in the city, transforming Cottonopolis
into avast theatre. Drab mid-Fifties existence was lent enchant-
ment by the beams of light which reached deep into the heart of
the city, a couple of miles from Maine Road and reflected
outwards to the suburbs. The roar of 70,000 voices echoed
through the streets, never more passionately than the night the
Red Devils beat Bilbao.
Inside Maine Road the pitch was a pool of light and colour.
The atmostphere tense, the play frenzied. The Basques were
tough, theyd come to battle, selecting an extra defender,
Etura, to replace Uribe who had scored two of their goals in the
first game. The early goal didnt come. Edwards, driving
forward more fiercely than any, created the chance for Denis
Viollet to score just before half-time. Bilbao, galvanised by
their international centre-half Jesus Garay, didnt buckle. They
were Basque, unlikely to shirk the bruising physicality, of
which, the dimmer English minds imagined, Continentals were
scared. Switzerland had taught Busby and his players different-
ly. The Spanish and Italians were better at kicking as well.
In the seventieth minute Tommy Taylor levelled the scores.
Five minutes from time a night of magnificent drama ended
triumphantly when Johnny Berry stroked home a chance
created by Taylors characteristic surge past Garay on the right.
Manchester United were through to the semi-finals of the
Champions Cup. The players left the field to a tumultuous,
almost hysterical ovation. Bilbaos captain, Piru Gainza ack-
nowledged the victors: They play with such passion we were
simply overwhelmed. The Spaniards had been on a bonus
rumoured to be several hundred pounds a man. The Red
Devils received appearance money of 5 each and 3 win
bonus. The maximum wage had increased to 15 (12 in
summer). For adding to the folklore of their city, while
restoring some of Englands diminished prestige, the legendary
Busby Babes received 23 in their wage packets the following
Friday. This was a good week.
210
The Double of League and Cup had not been achieved since
1897 when Aston Villa won both. The feat was deemed
impossible in the modern game. By April United were
favourites to make history by adding the FA Cup to the
Championship already secured. After beating Birmingham
City in the semi-final, United were due to meet Aston Villa at
Wembley. They were long odds on to do the impossible. In fact
the football world was now speculating about the unpreceden-
ted Treble with the European Champions Cup added to the
domestic spoils. The emergence of Billy Whelan and Bobby
Charlton had lowered the average age of the side to twenty-
one.
The lads had moved on from the Locarno and coffee-bars to
Manchesters more exotic after dark venues. The Queens,
Continental and Cromford Clubs were favoured on Wednesday
and Saturday nights. One or two got motor cars, David Pegg a
flashy little sports job. Jackie Blanchflower and Tommy Taylor
kept to their Saturday night routine: dogs, Chinese, Ritz and
Continental or Queens. Part of this ritual was a morning of
punishment on Sundays at Old Trafford. Sandy Busby, Matts
son would often see them there: You could set your watch by
Tommy and Jackie every Sunday, Sandy recalls. Theyd
pound out 22 laps flat to the boards, no half-pace stuff. That got
rid of the ale. It was completely voluntary. -
Sandy was a useful pro playing wing-half for Blackburn
Rovers, then a good First Division side with England inter-
national Ronnie Clayton and Bryan Douglas their star players.
Sandy was one of the lads, particularly popular with the
characters who, like himself, enjoyed a flutter and a pint. At
Paddy McGraths Cromford Club you could play blackjack and
roulette. Tommy Taylor, Jackie Blanchflower, Eddie Colman
and David Pegg were regulars. Roger Byrne was not a man for
the nightlife but he held his wedding reception in Paddys club,
as did John Doherty, another streetwise lad.
Matt and Jean Busby would sometimes drop in to the
Cromford, but their usual Saturday routine was a meal with
Louis and Muriel Edwards at the Bridge Inn where Bobby used
to wait for his mates a year or so before. Matt had, as Sandy puts
it, found his director. To become a director of Manchester
211
United was a great honour now. The Board needed new blood, ~
many names were being touted, though none impressed Matt, 
and some alarmed him. Louis was his nominee. Willie Satinoff,
whose family owned a Manchester clothing company, was
another possible Busby candidate. Both were close friends of
his who could be relied upon to support his decisions.
Of the two, Louis Edwards, being the more malleable, was
the most reliable. But Willie Satinoff was smart, and, like
Busby, a racing man. Willie was a snappy dresser, lean and
popular. He would make a good director but not a good stooge.
Real Madrid, holders of the Champions Cup, were Uniteds
European cup semi-final opponents. The first leg in Madrid
drew: 125,000 to Reals fantastic Bernabeau Stadium. The
wealthy Spanish club had gathered a collection of the finest
players in their country and had the worlds greatest footballer,
the Argentinian Alfredo Di Stefano. This was the kind of thing
the merchant blunderers who ran English football were against,
the old enemy elitism. Busby had seen Real play. His usual form
was to play down the opposition, talk about Uniteds strengths
rather than dwell on the possible dangers from the other side.
Bobby Charlton explains the difference after the trip to see Real:
Usually he would not talk about great players in opposing teams,
not wanting to frighten you. But now he couldnt contain himself.
This player Di Stefano hed seen had just about everything from
what he told us. Alongside the Argentinian, Real fielded
Raymond Kopa, the great French right-winger, with Gento, a
magical Spaniard on the left. Spanish internationals Rial and
Mateos also played in the forward line. Behind these aristocratic
forwards Real had a classically tough Spanish defence, inter-
- nationals Munoz, Marquitos and Zarraga. Soon they would add
Ferenc Puskas to this elite.
MURDER IN MADRID was the way the Daily Herald headlined
its report of the game. The opening two sentences convey a
sense of occasion. Real Madrid got away with murder before
125,000 witnesses at the Santiago Bernabeau Stadium here
today. They hacked, slashed, kicked and wrestled their way toa
3-1 victory in this European Cup semi-final first-leg. Tommy
Taylor scored Uniteds goal, but the Spaniards were too
worldly for the young Red Devils.
212
Manchester United switched on their new floodlights for the
first time for the second leg of the semi-final in which Bobby
Charlton played and scored in front of a crowd of 65,000. The
score, 2-2, meant United had failed in their first attempt in
Europe, but it was a brave and honourable defeat at the end of
an adventure which had transformed English football for ever,
enabling the best game in the world to measure its best
against reality. As Matt Busby depicted the Real Madrid
experience it was a contest between a great mature side and
one destined for greatness. He was satisfied and in no doubt
that his young teams day in Europe would come. The Double
remained, a historic goal for all the great English club sides in
the twentieth century, now a consolation prize for the Red
Devils.
The previous year Manchester City had won the FA Cup.
Some of their players had swopped their tickets for a new
Vauxhall Viva apiece. The official Football Association ruling
restricted each player to twelve Cup Final tickets. All club
representatives agreed to this rule at Football Association
meetings, then all went back to their clubs and permitted the
rule to be broken, so that traditionally players were given a
hundred tickets for the great day. This handsome allocation
would find its way onto the black-market. Thus, the heroes
would be rewarded. Nothing much, if at all, had changed since
Merediths days.
Year by year Matt Busby had found himself sucked into this
moral quagmire. A few quid in an envelope to the father of a
talented youngster for scouting, no bribe intended. The public
position was that Manchester United would only sign young-
sters who really wanted to play for them. The fact was that a
really determined and acquisitive parent could easily squeeze a
little cash out of the system provided he wasnt too greedy.
According to Jackie Blanchflower, the Manchester United
first team squad were each given a hundred tickets by the club
before the 1957 Cup Final. Some players looked after their
relatives and close friends and handed the rest to a man who
promised them a new car each in return. Their benefactors
bona fides seemed to be OK for he was known to be a business
associate of The Bosss pal Louis Edwards. The motor cars
213
never materialised and the tickets were not returned. The
Babes had been done.
Robbery was the cry again after the Cup Final. Six minutes
into the game Villas Irish international winger Peter
McParland floored Uniteds keeper Ray Wood with a resolute
challenge which many claimed was unacceptably reckless.
Wood left the field concussed, with what was later diagnosed as
a fractured jaw. Jackie Blanchflower, an international
colleague of McParlands was close to the incident: Woody was
a good keeper, but he didnt like to come off his line. Puffer,
we called him, he always had a fag in his mouth. He was a good
lad, who could laugh at himself. Old Tosher used to tell him that
if a barrel-load of hay went past him he wouldnt catch it. When
I see him now I say, Woody you were the second worst
goalkeeper I ever saw in my life. He always asks, Whos the
worst.
Peter was a naive lad. Villa told him that Woody was
suspect, to get in and let him know you're there early on.
Peter headed a ball from the edge of the box and kept running.
For once Woody came off his line to gather it. I can see it now.
I'll never forget, Ray braced himself for the challenge and then
tried to get out of the road but Peter caught him. We were only
about five minutes into the game. It was a sickener.
With no substitute allowed, United were down to ten men.
Roger asked Bobby to go in the goal but he didnt fancy it, so I
went in, Jackie recalls. At half-time United were level after
winning most of the first half battles. But Wembley was a bitch
with an extra man against you and McParland scored twice in
the second half. Apparently dead, with Ray Wood, dazed, back
in goal, United rallied desperately, Tommy Taylor rewarding
them with a goal close to the final whistle. But too late to
breathe life into the deflated Double dream. Busby was
composed in the dressing-room afterwards. He had long argued
for substitutes to be allowed, especially for goalkeepers. But
this was yet another gimmick the Football Association would
not countenance.
This sad climax to a glorious season saddened the nation, the
majority of whom, though not au fait with soccer, had been
enthralled by the blaze of youthful colour Busbys Red Devils
214
had ingrained in Englands image of itself. Fate as much as
Peter McParland had struck down the young heroes. It was the
way of the world, courage fated to lose even when triumph
seemed inevitable. More than a Cup was lost in many hearts
that day.
In the Catholic/Irish enclave of Collyhurst one fifteen-year-
old was particularly sad. Norbert Stiles was due to sign for
United the following week. He was a fan. United was his life. I
lived for them, he explains. My earliest memory is sitting on
my dads shoulders at Old Trafford as a six-year-old watching
the *48 team; Carey, Mitten, Rowley. I remember Johnny
Carey scoring a fantastic goal against Chelsea when they won
the Championship in 52. He hit a fantastic shot past Reg
Matthews.
Nobbys dad, Charlie, was the local undertaker. He was
Paddy McGraths childhood friend. People thought we had
money, Nobby remembers, but my grandfather owned the
business, my dad was on a wage like everyone else. My mum
was a sewer in the mill.
Nobby and his older brother, Charlie, went to St Pats
School. His grandfather was a Byrne from Wicklow in Ireland.
He came over to work on the railways. His sisters went into the
convent for food and shelter. We were Catholics and very
conscious of it, he explains. We wore shamrocks on St
Patricks Day and sang Faith of our Fathers (an Irish hymn)
rather than God save the Queen. We had a great sports
teacher called Mr Mulligan who got me involved in football. I
was small, but I played inside-forward for Manchester Boys and
wing-half for England Boys. You were either City or United, I
was United from the start.
Charlie and I used to play on Saturday mornings, go back
home for boiled chicken and dumplings and wed be at Old
Trafford by one or half-past. We stood at the score-board end.
Eddie Colman was my idol. I used to try and copy him, coming
side on and shimmying, but I was nothing like him. We didnt
have a television in those days. I remember myself and Charlie
walking down Oldham Road to watch United play on Match of the
Day ina television shop. Wed stand outside the window freezing.
The night they lost 4-0 to Bristol Rovers in the Cup I was gutted.
215
Nobby captained Manchester Boys. Bob Wilson and Bobby :
Tambling were in the same England Boys team. Another lad, 
Peter Bullock went to Birmingham. I think only the four of us
played League football, Nobby says. He was coveted by all the
big League clubs when Joe Armstrong came to the house. He
was a gentleman, he always got the mothers first. He went to
Lourdes and brought my mum a Miraculous Medal. Wolves
and Bolton both offered Nobbys dad 4,000 for his signature, a
sum that was the equivalent of five or six years earnings in those
days. My mum would have liked a television and afridge. But
they didnt tell me about the Wolves or Bolton money. My dad
said, Where do you want to go? I said United. We got no
money from United. I didnt want any.
Nobby Stiles signed for United for 3. 5s a week and 1
expenses which Joe Armstrong gave him in an envelope each
Friday. I kept the pound for myself and gave the wage packet
to me mum. That pound was probably an illegal payment.
The disappointments of 1957 were the spur for the new
campaign. Looking back, Matt Busby and Jimmy Murphy
would remember the summer of 57 as a blissful few months.
But the Wembley defeat rankled, the frustration a reminder
that their work was far from complete, that nothing could be
taken for granted. Sports oldest lesson  lifes perhaps  that
the day you think youve cracked it is the day you start to fade
was the foremost thought in the minds of these two old pros.
~. Bobby Charlton was bitterly disappointed to find himself
back in the reserves at the beginning of the 57/58 season. Hed
played in the Cup Final because Denis Viollet was nursing a
groin-strain. Now Viollet returned, with Billy Whelan in the
other inside-forward spot. Playing at Bolton in the reserves one
afternoon around this time Bobby took a throw-in on the
halfway-line. With a couple of minutes to go United led 1-0.
Bobbys throw was careless, across field rather than down the
touchline. A Bolton player intercepted and thirty seconds later
the scores were level. Jimmy went berserk in the dressing-
room. He gave me a terrible roasting, Charlton recalls. I was
embarrassed in front of the other players. But I never threw a
ball across the pitch in that situation again. It was a lesson in
professionalism and even though this was a Central League
216
match they all mattered to Jimmy. Thats what made me a
player. Little things, the difference between being a schoolboy
and a pro.
Nobby Stiles was soon singled out by Bert Whalley for
Jimmys special attention. He made a huge impression on me,
Nobby says. When I went there I was overawed. The players
were so good, youd see them in training and games and think,
Im never going to get this. Maybe I was Jimmys style of
player, but they were all his style . . . Duncan. . . Bobby. The
simple things hed say and for the first six months I thought,
Im seeing all these brilliant players and it doesnt look simple
to me. I remember seeing Bobby score an unbelievable goal,
an overhead bicycle-kick. But Jimmy made me see that if you
got the ball and gave it to a red shirt the game progressed from
there. Football is about getting it and giving it. And the passion
he spoke with was amazing. Jimmy would talk about fire in
your belly. See this red shirt, hed say, its the best in the
world, when you put that on nothing can beat you. I would
have gone through a brick wall for him. Bobby and Wilf will tell
you the same. It wasnt just the passion, he gave me confidence
because I could relate to the game as he explained it to me.
People say to me I was this or I was that, but what they dont
realise is, if you play for Manchester United and England
youve got to be able to play. Jimmy gave me the understand-
ing. They seem like small things but they added up.
The basic football education was mixed with experience of
dressing-room life. This could be very intimidating, as John
Giles explains: We were in awe of the first team players. I mean
you wouldnt go in the first team dressing-room unless you had
work in there. Running round the track at training in the
morning Id be scared stiff of them. Duncan Edwards would
come thundering past and you'd just get out of the way. They
wouldnt notice you. But you had to be fair to them,
Duncan, Tommy Taylor and David Pegg were only young lads
themselves, 21 or 22 and at that age youre not as good with
young fellas as you would be when you got older. ;
Eddie Colman, John remembers as the exception: Eddie
was very friendly, hed have a chat with you, know your name.
Eddie was Nobbys idol: I just looked at him from afar, I
217
couldnt take my eyes off him. He used to wear a pork-pie hat. I |
would love to have been able to go up to him and say, you are 
my idol, but I used to blush like anything when I'd meet him.
David Gaskill, a young goalkeeper, was the head ground staff
boy. Nobby remembers being pushed around by Gaskill:
David, Mark Pearson and Alex Dawson were a bit senior to
me. Gaskill had played in the first team in the Charity Shield so
he thought he could give the orders. Hed say, Get that brush,
brush this, brush that. Id say, Who are you, you do it. We
used to strip in the ballboys room. Going in the first team
dressing-room was a big deal. I remember Mark Pearson and
Alex Dawson getting hold of me one day. They wanted the first
teams autographs. They were scared of going in there cause
the lads didnt like signing. Its the same these days. I see
apprentices at United today and first team lads tell em to sod
off. Its a testing time for a kid. Anyway I took Mark and Alexs
books in and I went to Mark Jones and Duncan. They were gods
in my eyes, so I said, Will you sign this please, and Mark said,
Piss off. I knew if I went back to the ballboys room without
the autographs Id get battered in there so I said, Please,
Mark, sign it, and he told me to piss off again. And then he
said, Alright, give it here. He said, Arent you the young
fella who played for England Schoolboys at Wembley a few
weeks ago? I said yes, and he said, Well done, keep it up, and
I walked out feeling great.
a
12
Tragedy
When I saw the fear on Rogers face
it frightened me. He was a strong
man, not easily prey to fear.
Harry Gregg

_Manchester United began the season 1957-58 as expected,
' remaining unbeaten for six games, five of which they won
_ handsomely. The only blemish on the record was a 3-3 draw
_ away to Everton at Goodison Park. Then things went badly
' wrong. They lost three of their next four games; 4-0 at Bolton,
1-2 to Blackpool at home, and critically, 3-1 away to Wolves
_ at Molineux. In between on 25 September United travelled to
_ Dublin to play the great Irish club Shamrock Rovers in their
_ opening European Cup fixture. The result of the second leg of
this tie, a narrow 3-2 victory at Old Trafford, testifies to Rovers
ability. This was the best club side in Irish history. Forty-five |
thousand packed Dublins Dalymount Park for the first game.
For Billy Whelan whod been born a mile away in Cabra this
| was a very special night. He scored two goals in a 6-0 victory.
On this sultry early autumn evening the Red Devils cast their
magic spell upon this Georgian city which loves the English
game and had aproud soccer tradition of its own. Busby loved
Dublin, sensing a part of his past in its carefree, infectious
informality, and Dalymount was one of his marvellous nights,
his young side doing him proud with football that was elegant,
precise and, for those of us who watched from the terraces,
unbelievably grand.
We had seen other English teams: Stan Matthews, Tom
Finney, Wilf Mannion and Len Shackleton, the Clown Prince
of contemporary legend. Before television these men were
faces on the little black and white cards we collected from
219
sweet-cigarettes. The Charles Buchan Football Monthly maga-
zines would feature stunning photographs of Nat Lofthouse andi
Tommy Taylor leaping to impossible heights to head goals
which we could only imagine and wonder at. When they came
to Dublin the photos came alive, your blood ran cold with a
shiver of delight. The Red Devils were different to those
whod come before them. No baggy shorts, but neat white
pants, hitched up to show the perfect muscles on thighs of
unimaginable power. They wore v-necked red shirts without
the old collars of Matthews and Finney, trim and dashing, an
emblem of the gods whose lithe bodies they adorned. Football
never came to life so vividly, with such awesome beauty, as it
did in Dublin that night in 57. One goal remains in memory: a
long crossfield pass from Edwards finding David Pegg whod
drifted to the right-wing. Pegg was clear with only the Rovers
*keeper to beat. He paused for an instant as the keeper moved
forward to narrow his angle, then from twenty-five yards and
wide the god floated the ball, tantalisingly, over the head of his
foe to the far corner of the net. Exquisite. Perfection executed
with impossible grace and assurance. They lived up to their
legend that night. More than that, they were  or seemed 
unearthly, handsome creatures from another planet, more
heroic than any movie-star wed seen or could imagine. The
following Saturday they lost to Wolves in the League.
European football was a glamorous distraction. The
emotional exertions of the previous season now appeared to
cause delayed reaction. For a few weeks the champions lost
their focus, and Wolves took over at the top of the First
Division. Busby didnt panic. As hed explained to Billy Behan
in Dublin, his side was young, its final composition yet to be
decided. Some of the promising youngsters had gone, or soon
would. Jeff Whitefoot and Don Gibson had been transferred,
the latter to Sheffield Wednesday in his own interests after his
marriage to Matts daughter. When Gibson played poorly in a
game at Old Trafford shortly after news of his romance became
public the fans had jeered him. John Doherty left for Leicester
soon afterwards.
Matt felt that they were still only kids, despite winning two
Championships, Behan explains. He talked to me about
220
Bobby Charlton, and Liam Whelan when he was in Dublin.
Bobby wasnt even in the team. Ive got these two and they're
going to be as good as Puskas and Di Stefano, Matt said. The
problem with Liam was shyness, Matt felt he would become a
truly great player once he came out of his shell a little and
asserted himself more. Liam had scored 28 goals in the First
Division the season before, yet Matt believed there was more in
him. Bobby was even more exciting, but he was only 19.
Busbys concern for Whelan, his sensitivity to his young
players growing personality, is evidence of how closely he
observed every nuance of life at Old Trafford. Even at a time
when prosperity looked assured his own ambitions and expec-
tations were focused on horizons way beyond anyone elses. A
player who had scored twenty-eight First Division goals was not
the finished product. The team likewise. Champions two years
running, young legends in the country outside Old Trafford,
they still had a long way to go to satisfy his aspirations, so when
they lost two more home games in succession to Spurs and
Chelsea at the end of November, Busby acted ruthlessly.
Twenty-five-year-old Harry Gregg, a Northern Ireland team-
mate of Jackie Blanchflowers was signed from Doncaster
Rovers for 23,500, a British record for a goalkeeper. Busby
inquired about Harrys character, and, assured that all was fine,
closed the deal. Gregg was an unorthodox keeper who, unlike
Ray Wood, loved to dominate his penalty area, indeed was
prone to wander further afield, pushing outside the eighteen-
yard line to marshal his defence. He was introduced to the side
for the home game against Leicester City on 21 December. Ina
dramatic response to the autumns disappointment, Busby
dropped four. players. Ray Wood, Johnny Berry, David Pegg
and Billy Whelan. Kenny Morgans, an eighteen-year-old from
the previous seasons FA Youth Cup winning team, replaced
Berry. Bobby Charlton came in for Whelan; Albert Scanlon for
Pegg. Leicester were demolished 40 to set up a sequence of
seven unbeaten games which put United back in the title race.
Nobody could be sure of their place was the message Busby sent
to his young champions dressing-room. Jackie Blanchflower
had discovered the truth of this a couple of weeks earlier. Jackie
had kept his friend Mark Jones in the reserves for three
221
|
months, yet an international appearance for Northern Ireland
allowed Jones to reclaim his centre-half position and put Jackie
back in the reserves.
United had progressed in the European Cup, eliminating
Dukla Prague 3-1 on aggregate, the 3-0 home leg victory
proving conclusive. Red Star Belgrade awaited Englands
champions in the quarter-final.
Uniteds FA Cup campaign began away to Workington,
perennial strugglers at the foot of the Football League. On an
icy pitch before 21,000 excited home supporters the Football
Leagues poorest relation led 1-0 at half-time. Legend had
touched Busbys great young side. There was a streak of hubris
which could colour their performance on occasions. Working-
ton benefited from this that day as Bristol Rovers had benefited
a couple of seasons before. Denis Viollet solved the problem
with a second-half hat-trick.
United beat Red Star 2-1 with goals from Eddie Colman and
Bobby Charlton in the quarter-final first leg at Old Trafford on
14 January. The second leg would be a battle. Three days
afterwards United were due to play Wolves at home in a game
that would, it was felt, decide the Championship. Important
though Europe was, winning three Championships in a row, as
Herbert Chapman had with Arsenal before the war, was the
goal Matt Busby secretly treasured. That ambition was
nourished by two spectacular victories in the League games
which preceded the trip to Belgrade for the return match with
Red Star. First Bolton were beaten 72 at Old Trafford on 18
January, Bobby Charlton scoring three of the goals, and then
on 1 February 63,000 packed Highbury to see the Red Devils
play Arsenal. United took a 30 lead, lost it in the second-half,
scored two more to which Arsenal once again replied. The final
score was 54, the match a classic, Busbys team living up to its
reputation for brilliance and a daring that bordered on reckless-
ness.
The Manchester lads loved going to London and showing off,
and the big city loved them. They were cavaliers from the
North which was grey and boring, or so the Cockneys liked to
claim. Disproving that myth was a pleasure for Busbys team.
For Busby too. He felt himself to be a Mancunian now. This was
222
no denial of his Scottishness, rather a reflection of the precious
sense of place he possessed after almost thirty years in
Cottonopolis. Matt had been offered jobs elsewhere, by Spurs
and Real Madrid, the latter promising him unimagined finan-
cial reward, and though he had been flattered or, more
accurately, pleased to have his work acknowledged, he was
never tempted.
Manchester was his place. The city allowed him to be what he
was, the serious, dutiful Catholic, the man exemplifying the
boy, observing the imperatives of behaviour and obligation to
' caste his mother Nellie had preached to her children. This was

_
Matt the public man. The private man could exist with equal
| facility in Manchester. This man was the grandson of Jimmy
Greer: Irish, human and, yes, a touch feckless, expansive,
_ defying the conventions of Miners Row. This Matt remained
_ hidden from public view. The deception was essential. First a
Catholic, then a professional football man, his life had been a
_ long struggle against prejudice of one kind or another. The
public mask remained in place, but the other part of his spirit
' was indulged in his friendships  Paddy McGrath, Willie
i
ee
Satinoff, Louis Edwards, Johnny Foy - and his love of a
gamble. Johnny Foy, the bookmaker, was one of those used by
the professional gambler Alex Bird to place his bets. Bird had
hurt the big bookies far too often, and they were wary now of
- accepting his bets, so a network of surrogates existed to spread
_ Birds money around the big bookmakers. Foy was one of
_ Birds men. Bird didnt have many bets, rather he specialised in
two-year old horses whose ability he measured by the clock.
In an age when racecourse timing systems were universally
inaccurate  a flaw reflected in the official form-book  Bird had
the advantage of the correct time which he calculated on the
course with his own stop-watch. Armed with the best informa-
tion, Britains biggest punter waged war on the bookies. Matts
arrangement with Johnny Foy allowed him to be privy to Birds
bets, and for several years he followed the system investing up
to 50 a time on Birds selections. The bets were substantial as
were the wins and losses.
This indulgence was merely a distraction. The truest recon-
ciliation of Busbys public and private selves was his Red
223
1
Devils on a day such as the one at Highbury on 1 February
1958. The style was pure Busby, pure Manchester: Roger
Byrne and Duncan Edwards, clinical, powerful, ruthless; Eddie
Colman, daring, expansive; Denis Viollet, smooth, elusive,
clever; Tommy Taylor and Mark Jones, as tough and brave as
the navvies on the Ship Canal.
Busby hated the sobriquet Busby Babes. It proposed
innocence, naivety, callow youth, and this was not his team.
Red Devils was closer to the truth. Sometimes, Busby
confided to his pals, hed wish the other team to score first, to
rouse their anger, make them stretch to the limits of their
courage and talent. At Highbury this desire was fulfilled.
The Manchester United party left for Belgrade on Monday
morning with no member of the Board accompanying them.
Tragedy had struck at Highbury two days earlier when a United
director, George Whittaker, collapsed and died of a heart
attack, and Harold Hardman rarely travelled abroad anyway.
Now he and his fellow directors stayed behind for Whittakers
funeral. Louis Edwards had intended making the journey to
Yugoslavia, but he too remained in Manchester to pay his last
respects to a man who, ironically, had vetoed his election to the
Manchester United Board a few weeks before. Whittaker had
blocked the nomination, much to Matt Busbys annoyance, but
this battle was for another day. Red Star and Wolves the
following Saturday were the more immediate concern.
Boarding the plane for the outward trip the players were
surprised by the unusual interior. The twin-engined
Elizabethan had seats facing back and front, unlike the
Viscounts and Dakotas they were familiar with from previous
trips to Europe. The layout suited the card-school, among them
Harry Gregg, who loved his game of poker. Arriving at Old
Trafford he found plenty of kindred spirits - Ray Wood, Billy
Whelan, Johnny Berry and Jackie Blanchflower were enthusi-
asts, poker the favoured game. Busby kept an eye on the card-
school. He didnt like the sometimes heavy gambling which
could drain the teams emotions. Money won from friends and
colleagues was not the same as takings from a bookie. But cards
killed the boredom of coach journeys, hotel rooms and lodging
houses and was better than the alternatives: boozing and ladies.
224
*

Belgrade was miserable. The hotel was spartan. People queued
for food, for everything, it seemed.
A slight doubt over Roger Byrnes fitness had earned Geoff
Bent a rare trip with the first team. Bent, a Salfordian, had
played a dozen games as Byrnes deputy in the previous two
years. Although yet to play a first team game this season, he was
generally acknowledged to be a player of sufficient quality to
get a place in most League sides.
Roger Byrne was cleared to play. United expected a battle.
Within ninety seconds the pressure eased when Denis Viollet
took a simple chance to make the score 3-1 on aggregate. By
half-time United looked assured of their semi-final place. Two
brilliant goals from Bobby Charlton left Red Star trailing 51 in
the tie.
Two minutes into the second half Red Star scored, and then
again eight minutes later from the penalty spot to bring the
score to S3. The expected battle began. For thirty-five minutes
the Yugoslavs laid siege in Uniteds half. Gregg made spectacu-
lar saves on his line and ventured outside his penalty area when
necessary. Four minutes from time he advanced to gather a ball
on the edge of the eighteen-yard box and stumbled a yard too
far. Red Stars internationa! forward, Kostic, tried to flight the
ball over the wall of red shirts. It clipped Viollets head and
looped beyond Greggs desperate reach. The final minutes of
acute anxiety were fraught with the suspicion that the referee
would succumb to the home crowds hysteria by awarding
another penalty for any incident in the box. Time ran out. In the
dressing-room they slumped, relieved. They had survived,
having typically flirted with danger.
Early evening. The day victorious, the night was theirs to
savour. The banquet would be endured, the dignitaries self-
regarding speeches mocked on the players table. Barely
suppressing their titters, they would wait for the Present. In
Madrid the year before theyd got a gold watch each. Here in
Belgrade it was a cheap trinket. The waitresses were gorgeous,
Slavic, teasing these English footballers. The Red Star players
were older, harder, less exuberant. Eddies eyes twinkled
mischievously at all, the benign urchin, irrepressible even in
225
club blazer and tie, the uniform of formal club occasions.
Outside the banquet hall the reporters filed tomorrows story, 
frustrated by the Yugoslav telephone system, as they searched
for new words to describe another performance that mixed the
brilliant with the valiant. George Follows of the Daily Herald
informed his readers that this had been the best football United
ever played. Tom Jackson had commanded the front-page lead
in the early editions of that afternoons Manchester Evening
News to report UNITED SNATCH 3-0 Cup LEap. The second
half altered the scoreline but not the end result. United were
through to the semi-finals of the European Cup once more.
After the banquet Matt took them to a private room in the
hotel. He ordered beers and whisky for himself and the other
non-playing members of Uniteds party. As on other nights in
Europe they gathered for a couple of private hours together
getting gently intoxicated. Jimmy Murphy was away with the
Welsh international side he managed in his spare time. Theyd
had a couple of good nights previously in Europe when Jimmy
played the piano for a singsong, mixing the popular with his
own renditions of Chopin and Bach. The Bosss contribution
was always the highlight of those rare hours of music, his song
the old Harry Lauder classic I Belong to Glasgow. The lads
would join in for the chorus but only Matt knew every word of
the verses, his rich baritone voice touching its most emotive
note when he reached the line Im only a common old working
man, as anyone here can see. But when I get a couple of drinks
on a Saturday Glasgow belongs to me. A song in memory of his
youth and Jimmy Greer who took him to the Glasgow Empire
to see Lauder sing this anthem of the Scots working-class on
Saturday nights now evoked with real feeling.
In Belgrade the card players were getting restless. Tommy
Taylor, David Pegg, and Bobby Charlton repaired to the hotel
bar, disappointed like Denis Viollet that Belgrade offered no
exotic nightlife. The Boss reminded them of Wolves on
Saturday and put them on their honour to be in bed by a
reasonable hour.
The card school went on to the very small hours with Harry
Gregg winning. They were playing for dinars, the local currency
~ 3,000 to the 1 or something. The tension of the poker hands
226
Ste
east

was occasionally broken by the unreality of the bets. Ill open
for three thousand. Ill make it six thousand to play. It
sounded big-time. They laughed at the daftness of it.
They left Belgrade in mid-morning, tired, flat, anxious to get
home. They were due to stop at Munich to refuel and arrive in
Manchester at six oclock. Wolves and the Championship
loomed larger as the Elizabethan droned across snowbound
Central Europe. Munich airport was starkly anonymous as they
drifted in to land. The card school was in abeyance because of a
dispute that had arisen over Harrys insistence that they
continue playing for dinars, a large wad of which hed been
unable to spend at Belgrade airport. He promised to play for
sterling once theyd taken off again from Munich.
Captain James Thain was in command of the charter flight.
His friend Captain Ken Rayment was co-pilot. Because they
were friends a certain informality was present on the flight-deck
of 609 Zule Uniform, and they had agreed that Thain would fly
the outward journey with Rayment taking charge for the trip
back to Manchester. BEA regulations forbade captain and
first-officer from changing seats, insisting that the captain stay
in the left-hand seat. Thain, however, remained in his original
position because he found it difficult to monitor the instrument
reading from the left-hand seat, as they were not duplicated on
the panel in front of him. Rayment consented to this arrange-
ment despite the fact that as pilot for the return flight one must
assume he needed to see the panels reading at least as much as
his co-pilot. -
The passengers were not due to disembark at Munich.
Refuelling would take only twenty minutes or so. On their first
attempt to take, off after completing the refuelling the aircraft
came to a halt after forty seconds. The engines had sounded an
uneven note which suggested there was boost surging, a
problem which Thain subsequently claimed was not uncom-
mon with Elizabethans at the time, particularly at airports like
Munich because of their height above sea-level. One cause of
boost surging was opening the throttles too quickly, Thain
explained, Ken said that at the start of our next run we would
open the throttles a little before releasing the brakes and then
continue to open them more slowly. It was Thains opinion that
227


despite the uneven engine sound there was not much dais
that the take-off power of the aircraft would be affected
because the Elizabethans were very powerful in their day and
you could actually take off on one engine.
At 14.34 hours clearance was given for another attempt.
Again Thain aborted take-off forty seconds after it began, and
the plane taxied back to the airport building for Thain to consult
BEAs station engineer at Munich. Twenty minutes of anxiety
ended for the passengers when Captain Rayment told them
there would be a short delay as there was a technical fault. It
was snowing quite heavily. The party left the plane for a cup of
tea while the problem was being sorted out.
Matt Busby seemed tired but relaxed. He had been in
hospital for a minor operation the previous week, now he was
weary and had slumbered through the BelgradeMunich leg of
the journey. Getting home was everyones priority, the pros-
pect of an overnight stay in Munich unappealing. While they
were getting refreshments in the cafe someone speculated that
they might have to travel back to England by ship via the Hook
of Holland if the weather deteriorated further. This suggestion
was greeted by groans of dismay.
Thain and Rayment remained in the cockpit of the aircraft.
Station engineer William Black came to join them to discuss the
problem. The fate of Flight 609 was decided in the next five
minutes.
Black confirmed that boost surging was common at airports
like Munich and recommended the procedures for overcoming
it. We told him we had tried these without eliminating the
noise, Thain later explained. Black said that the engines could
be retuned but it would mean an overnight stop. Thains reply
was that I didnt think this was necessary because the starboard
engine had performed normally. Thain and Rayment had, in
effect, decided to take a chance rather than the more prudent
course of having the engines checked and retuned overnight.
We talked about the snow and looked at the wings from the
flight-deck. We had lost the film of snow we had noticed before
our first departure and decided there was no need to have the
wings swept, Thain reported afterwards.
228
The passengers had only been in the terminal building about
ten minutes when they were recalled to the plane. There was
some tension among the party, but this was not the first time
theyd been involved in airport drama. Twelve months
previously theyd swept snow off the wings in Bilbao, and that
journey home had been interrupted by an emergency landing in
Jersey.
At 14.56 Captain Rayment was given permission to taxi out
to the runway. A passenger count revealed that someone was
missing. Then the plane doors were re-opened and Alf Clarke,
who had been phoning news of the delay to the Manchester
Evening Chronicle, entered to derisive cheers. At 15.03.06 the
Elizabethan began rolling. Harry Gregg glanced at Roger
Byrne sitting at the window seat diagonally across the aisle from
him. When I saw the fear in his face it frightened me. Roger
was a strong man, not easily prey to fear, he says.
The first two attempts to take off had been quite unnerving
for me, possibly more frightening than the third time as I had
been watching the wheels sticking in the slush. When we got
back into the plane some of us were quite nervy. I saw the
steward actually strapped into his seat when we got on which
was not very reassuring! Alf Clarke was late getting back to the
plane and we had to wait for him. I was quite worried by this
time. I sat very. low in my seat, opened my trousers and my
collar and sank down into the seat with my legs up. I tried to
crack a few jokes, but Johnny Berry, who was sitting near me,
was too anxious to be amused by them and said he thought we
fe would all be killed. Billy Whelan, who was sitting next to him,
said Well if thats going to happen Im ready for it.
We set off once again and I remember looking out of the
window and seeing a tree and a house passing by; and suddenly
we were passing places we had not done before. Everything
went black all of asudden and sparks began to fly. I was hit hard
on the back of the head and I thought the top of my skull had
been cut off. The plane seemed to turn on its side, sort of upside
down. There was no crying. There was just silence and
blackness and then for a second there was daylight again. I
thought I was dead so I sat there quietly and a strange idea
229
/
passed through my mind. I remember thinking Thad hada great ;
life and a wonderful family and I couldnt speak German!
There was a great hissing noise all around me andI realised
that I was still alive and lying on my side in my seat. I unfastened
my seatbelt and began to climb out. There was still no sound
apart from this tremendous hissing. Captain Thain suddenly
appeared holding a fire extinguisher and told me to run for it. I
was about to take his advice when I heard a child crying so I
crawled back into the wreckage. People outside were shouting,
Get out, get out, run for it. I shouted to them, Come back
you bastards, there are people alive inside. I found the baby
and started to carry it out. The radio operator took the child ~
from me and I went back into the debris and found her mother
but she was in a bad condition. I found Albert Scanion who was
badly hurt and I tried to get him out too, but he was trapped by
his feet and I couldnt move him. Peter Howard, the Daily Mail
photographer, was with Albert keeping him company. I ran
round to the back of the plane and found Bobby Charlton and
Denis Viollet lying in a pool of water. I thought they were dead
and dragged their bodies, like rag dolls, into the seats which had
been thrown about twenty yards from the plane. I started
calling for Jackie. As I searched for him I saw the tail end of the
plane ablaze with flames. I found Matt Busby, who was
conscious but holding his chest in pain. He was propped up on
his elbow and did not look too badly hurt, although his foot was
broken. I left him and found Blanchie, who was sitting up to his
waist in water. Roger was close by him. Jackies arm was in a
bad way and bleeding badly, so I tied a tourniquet on it with my
tie. I pulled so hard on it that I snapped my tie in half but
managed to tie his arm with the bit that was left.
Suddenly a man ina long overcoat arrived carrying a syringe.
I shouted to him to go and help the injured in the aircraft but _
suddenly there were some explosions from the burning half of
the plane and the force of them threw this doctor off his feet. He
was a strange sight falling on his backside in the snow, with his
legs in the air still holding that syringe in his hand.
I turned round and got the shock of my life for there were
Denis and Bobby standing, just watching the fire. I was so
relieved as I had been sure that they were dead. Shortly after
230
this, when it looked as though the rescuers had everything
under control, I sank to my knees and wept, thanking God that
some of us had been saved. I had never seen death before and
never wanted to see it again.
Things began to happen fairly rapidly and Denis, Bobby and
I were put into a Volkswagen van. I sat in the front with Bill
' Foulkes who appeared to have come through unscathed.
Johnny Berry and Jackie were lying in the back with Matt, all
were badly injured. As we set off, the driver was obviously in a
| great hurry and driving so rapidly that Billy felt something
_ dreadful was going to happen. I remember him getting up and
belting the driver who appeared to take no notice; but he got us
to the hospital.
In the hospital they gathered all the survivors together and
_ those of us who could walk were asked to identify the others.
| We were given some soup to warm us up but I remember that
even that had a disinfected hospital smell. I remember hearing
| over the intercom in the hospital that we had lost Frank Swift.
The whole atmosphere was so unpleasant, and there was
- nothing that Foulkesy and I could do and we decided to get out,
although I had a cut nose which I did not want treated. As a
result my nostrils are now of different sizes.
We went to a hotel in Munich where the manager gave us
- each a warm coat and some other clothes. Somebody also gave
us some whisky. I remember looking out of the bedroom
- window and seeing the snow piled as high as the cars. I thought
_ about what the snow was burying at the airport.
Jackie Blanchflower never lost consciousness. It was like
going down a cobbled road. The plane broke in half at the card
tables. I was thrown out the top. The front part of the plane
kept going. I saw it twisting round, then it stopped and alittle
_ puff of fire was coming out of it. I was lying in the slush. Roger
Byrne was lying right across my feet with his eyes open. He was
just in his vest and underpants, no socks or shoes on. I started
talking to him. Then Harry came.
Wilf McGuinness had been due to travel to Belgrade. His
name was on the list pinned up by Matt Busby the previous
Friday. I was to report on Monday morning but on the
Saturday my knee locked in the reserves. I was carried off and
231
= ai
Ted Dalton thought I had a cartilage problem when I went or
treatment on the Saturday morning. So that was me off the trip
I went to a specialist on the Monday and it was a cartilage. He
told me theyd operate on Friday.
McGuinness was not immediately alarmed when news of an
accident at Munich reached Manchester in mid-afternoon. I
think it was about 3.30 when rumours started going round. I was
with a pal of mine who worked on the sales side of the News
Chronicle. We were walking along and we heard about a plane
crash. Theyd clumped something on the runway. I felt they
were probably making something out of nothing. The plane
hadnt been in the air so I thought theyre alright. We went to
my pals office to check out what had happened. At first all we
got was news of surivivors: Harry Gregg, Denis Viollet, Bobby
Charlton and Bill Foulkes. These were the first names we got. I
was in a bit of a state of shock. We drove home.
It was about six oclock when I got home. My mother and
father said there are deaths. So I went with my parents to
Mount Carmel to do a novena. I prayed. Iremember crying and
praying  mainly for Eddie Colman and Billy Whelan. I
remember saying to God, I'll do anything if theyre alright. 
Gordon Clayton was also out through injury. Hed played
two first team games the previous season but the arthritis that
would subsequently finish him had just been diagnosed.
Gordon was in their old haunt, the Ritz Ballroom, at an
afternoon Tea Dance, when the news came through. I was
sitting on the balcony having a coffee with Jackie Lynch who
managed the Ritz. I didnt believe it. Theres always someone
saying something like that. But I went out to get a paper, and
came back and said its true.
The first person Gordon thought of was Mark Joness wife,
June, who was expecting a baby. I got a taxi from town to their
house on Kings Road, Chorlton. June wasnt in. It turned out
shed been in the supermarket when someone blurted out,
The Manchester United planes crashed. The next person I
thought about was Jackies wife Jean. They lived on Ryebank
Road. So I went round to Jean. I stayed with her that night,
answering the phone and dealing with callers to the house. It
was bedlam. Jean was in a terrible state. We knew Jackie was
232
alive, but wed no idea in what state. So we just waited for a_
phone call.
John Giles and Nobby Stiles were at the ground. The
__afternoons work was over. The ground staff lads were waiting
for Arthur Powell to let them go. Arthur was keeping them in
suspense. Bill Inglis and Arthur came into the reserve team
dressing-room together. Sit down, lads, Ive got some bad
news for you, Bill said. The plane has crashed. They didnt
have any details but the two dressing-room old-timers didnt
think it was too serious. Well let you know later, Arthur told
the lads. ,
We sat joking among ourselves, Nobby recalls. We thought
theyd have broken arms or something. We might get a game
in the A team now, someone said. There was no further
news so Arthur let them home.
I got a bus into town, Nobby remembers. I got off at
Piccadilly to get the 112 up Rochdale Road to home. I bought a
paper. It said, Many Dead. I'll never forget it. I got off at
Cassidys pub, my stop. There was a church there so I went in
and prayed. I just cried. I was a punter, a supporter, I wasnt
just praying for United, I idolised them.
When I got home everyone was devastated. It was a rough
area ours, little terraced houses with the front doors always
open. We listened to the radio all night. People were in a state
of shock.
Paddy McGrath heard the news in a phone call from his
brother. The sportswriter Frank McGhee called later to tell him
that Matt had been pulled out of the wreckage but they didnt
know if he was dead or alive. Paddy crossed Manchester to the
Busby home in Chorlton. The city was quiet. It was strange, a
kind of depression I had never seen, even during the war.
Sandy Busby arrived at Victoria Station on his way home
from training at Blackburn Rovers where he was reserve wing-
half under Johnny Careys management. I saw the billboards at
the station but I thought it was just publicity, just something to _
sell papers. Then I thought, I better phone home just in case.
Two friends of Matt and Jeans from Bellshill were down on a
visit. My Auntie was a bit of a panicker. She said,
233
1
Get home quick, get a taxi.  When he arrived home Sandy
realised the seriousness of things for the first time: Me mam
was in a state of shock. She was just sitting on the sofa and no
one could get any sense from her. I wasnt religious, but I ran
upstairs to my bedroom and knelt down and prayed. All of a
sudden my Uncle Johnny came running up the stairs screaming,
Hes alive, hes alive.  A phone call had assured them that
Matt was alive. As soon as me mam heard me dad was alive she
was right.
Jimmy Murphy arrived at London Road Station just before
four oclock. His taxi driver smilingly surmised that United
would win the European Cup this year. Jimmy nodded. Wales
had played Israel in Cardiff the night before, and Jimmys mind
was already on the coming weekends work. The game with
Wolves preoccupied him. He wondered if all the players were
fit after Belgrade. At Old Trafford, Alma George, Matt
Busbys secretary, broke the news:
The fingers of the clock on the wall pointed to four oclock
when Ifirst heard of the tragedy, and they were pointing at four
oclock when I went home the following morning. Dont ask me
what I did. I was living a nightmare. All I know is that there was
a bottle of Scotch in my cupboard and the following morning it
was empty  and that was extraordinary. I am a beer drinker yet
I must have drunk a bottle of whisky without knowing.
Like everyone else I was too numb to take in the awful grief.
Agony piled on agony as the hours ticked by. Thousands
hurried down to the ground to see if they could help; the police
threw a protective cordon around relatives and friends who had
lost their loved ones. Those of us left at the ground did our best
to calm and console the grief stricken. But what word of
sympathy could I find to comfort the bereaved? There was
nothing to lift the despair. I did not sleep that night.
When news of the tragedy broke, a pall of grief spread across
the nation. The novelist H. E. Bates reflected the mood of early
evening when he later wrote:

Late on a cold February afternoon, I was driving home
from London when I suddenly saw, under the first lighted
street lamps, one of those blue and yellow news placards
234
that are designed so often to shock you into buying a
newspaper you dont particularly want and that nine times
out of ten, you would be just as well off without.
MANCHESTER UNITED AIR CRASH, it said. My immediate
reaction was, I confess, a mildly cynical one. The
announcement seemed to me to belong to precisely the
same category aS WINSTON CHURCHILL IN CAR CRASH  the
car crash almost invariably turning out to be nothing more
than a tender argument between the starting handle of an
ancient Austin Seven and the great mans Rolls somewhere
in the region of Parliament Square. I am getting too old, I
thought, to be caught by newspaper screamers.
At six oclock, out of pure curiosity, I turned on my
television set. As the news came on, the screen seemed to
go black. The normally urbane voice of the announcer
seemed to turn into a sledgehammer. My eyes went deathly
cold and I sat listening with a frozen brain to that cruel and
shocking list of casualties that was now to give the despised
word Munich an even sadder meaning than it had acquired
on a day before the war when a Prime Minister had come
home to London, waving a pitiful piece of paper, and most
of us knew that new calamities of war were inevitable.

Jimmy Saville had been preparing for that nights Manchester
Press Ball at the Plaza. I put a notice outside the Plaza. It just
said, Press Ball cancelled. Then I locked the door and we sat
around, my staff and myself, listening to reports as they came
| through on the radio. We had to put the radio in the middle of
| the floor before it would work properly  something to do with
the aerial. All around there was food prepared for the guests
-and though we were in a ballroom, dancing was the furthest
thing from our minds.
Even as we heard the news bulletins it was hard to conceive
that such a terrible thing had happened. We stayed there all night.
It was one of the most shattering experiences ever to confront a
city  the biggest disaster Manchester had ever known.
In Manchester the agony was personal. People wept openly
_in shops and bus-shelters. Most were too numb with shock to
ery, an aching disbelief seeped into the communal soul.
At ten past ten that evening Dick Colman took a call from
Jimmy Murphy at Old Trafford confirming that Eddie was one
Zo
of those dead. I told the family and left the house, Eddiess.
father later recalled. I dont remember anything from that
moment until I suddenly realised I was standing in Piccadilly
Manchester sometime after three in the morning, soaked to the
skin wearing my slippers. I didnt sleep or eat for two weeks.
The Busby house was full. Jean recovered enough to begin
thinking of others. Sheena was sent round to Tom Currys
house. Tom was one of the first confirmed dead. Frank Swift
was among the eight journalists killed. His wife, Jean, and
daughter were in the Busby house. We heard about Frank and
I asked his daughters boyfriend to take them home and tell
them, Paddy McGrath recalls. Johnny Carey arrived from
Blackburn. Henry Rose was another killed instantly. His
girlfriend arrived at the Busbys not knowing of Henrys fate. A
doctor was called to sedate her.
The scale of the Munich Air Disaster became clear overnight.
The following morning newspapers reported twenty-one dead,
among them seven players, coach Bert Whalley, trainer Tom
Curry, secretary Walter Crickmer, and Matt Busbys business-
man friend Willie Satinoff. Busby and Duncan Edwards were
reported to be fighting for their lives.
The players killed were: Roger Byrne, David Pegg, Tommy
Taylor, Eddie Colman, Mark Jones, Billy Whelan and Geoff
Bent. The journalists who perished were: Alf Clarke, Man-
chester Evening Chronicle; Tom Jackson, Manchester Evening
News, Don Davis, Old International of the Manchester
Guardian; George Follows, Daily Herald; Archie Ledbrook,
Daily Mirror; Eric Thompson, Daily Mail; Frank Swift, News
of the World; and Henry Rose of the Daily Express, renowned
for his populist prose. Rose, a Jewish Mancunian, was a roguish
iconoclast, who often irritated Busby and his team. But this
colourful character was as much a part of the city as the players
he wrote about. Busbys fondness for Henry had been evident a
couple of weeks before when hed attended a party to celebrate
Roses twenty-fifth year on the Express.
Wilf McGuinness turned up at Old Trafford on Friday
morning: We were in the dressing-room. Bill Inglis came in and
we all just sat there looking at each other. We didnt speak, say
how sad it was or anything. We just stared at each other.
236
13
Going On
Although we mourn our dead and
grieve for our wounded we believe
our great days are not done for us.
Manchester United will rise again.
Harold Hardman

On Friday 7 February the Manchester United Board met at
Alan Gibsons home in Bowden, Cheshire. The death of
George Whittaker had left the club with just three directors:
Gibson, Harold Hardman and William Petherbridge. All
attended this meeting convened at the home of James Gibsons
son. Condolences were extended to the families of the deceased
and injured; Walter Crickmers assistant Les Olive was
appointed acting secretary, and the minutes record: It was
proposed, seconded and carried unanimously that Mr Louis
Edwards of *Caudebec, Alderley Edge, Cheshire, be and is
hereby appointed and co-opted as an additional Director of the
Company.
The Busby family, Jimmy Murphy and aparty of relatives
and friends of the dead and injured were already in Munich
when the board meeting concluded in Cheshire. Dr Georg
Maurer, Chief Surgeon at Rechts der Isar Hospital, told Jean,
Sheena, Sandy and Jimmy Murphy that Matts chances of
survival were no better than fifty-fifty. His chest had been
crushed and he had suffered massive internal and external
injuries. He was in an oxygen tent, his breathing assisted by a
tracheotomy because his left lung had collapsed. When they
took the lift up to the Intensive Care Unit Sandy walked
anxiously ahead of the group in the company of a nurse. I was
walking along looking in each room to see if I could recognise
anybody. I walked past one room and this poor old man was in a
237
ee 1
plastic oxygen tent. I was three yards past and thenI realised it
was my dad, Sandy recalls. He was a strange green kind of 4

colour. I ran back to get hold of my mother to warn her what to
expect.
Busby was hovering between sleep and consciousness. Jean
held his hand. He seemed to acknowledge their presence.
Sheena and Sandy begged him not to leave them. Twice he was
given the Last Rites. After he slipped back to sleep Jean,
Sheena and Sandy went to comfort the others of their family.
Duncan was the most critically injured. As with Matt, Duncans
injuries would have killed other men instantly, but both men
were immensely strong physically, both had unusual depths of
spirit. In Edwardss case that was all that was keeping him alive.
Jimmy Murphy stood soothing the young giant as the Busbys
arrived at his bedside. In a fleeting moment of recognition
Duncan had responded to Jimmys presence by asking, What
time is kick-off on Saturday?
Sandy Busby and Duncan had been pals. On dark nights at
the Cliff theyd trained and larked about together. At the
bedside in Rechts der Isar the horror of the scene was
intensified for Sandy by memories of happier, carefree times
hed spent with Duncan. He was a real Brummie, Sandy
reflects, his favourite expression was chief, All right chief
hed greet you. He was shy with strangers but with the lads he
was great, he was always a young lad at heart, even when he was
in the England team.
He believed in himself, that he could do anything. We were
training at the Cliff one night and there was a young amateur lad
called Alan Walsh who was a crack gymnast. So were running
round the track and we say to Alan, Do us a somersault. Off
he goes down the pitch and does this incredible somersault. Big
Duncan is looking at this and says, I can do that. Of course he
had a go and landed on his arse.
Sandy used to travel to the Cliff by bike, and Duncan loved
tearing around the training ground on the bike. One night a tyre
was punctured when Sandy went to get it to go home. Duncan
was missing. I could have strangled him, Sandy says. Next
time I saw him it was All right Chief. 
For Duncan Edwards it would never be all right again. Five
238
days after the crash he was put on an artificial kidney. He fought
for two weeks but, at 01.12 on 21 February 1958 the greatest
footballer the British game had known died. He was twenty-
one. Dr Maurer said, I do not think anyone other than this
young man could have survived so long. His resistance made us
admire him. Duncans last words were those hed whispered to
Jimmy Murphy asking about kick-off time for the match against
Wolves that would decide the Championship.
News of Duncan Edwardss death deepened the sense of loss .
at Old Trafford. He more than anyone had been the symbol of
indestructible youth, the most awesomely vigorous of the Red
Devils. We thought Duncan was going to come back, Wilf
McGuinness confirms, his death was another shattering blow.
The coffins returned from Munich to rest in the gym at Old
Trafford, where the players now gone had played endless
games of head-tennis. It was to this macabre setting that Jimmy
Murphy returned from Munich to ensure the clubs survival.
Jimmy buried his grief, as, in previous times he had concealed
the warm, sensitive core of his nature, in order that he should
do his duty better. Life must go on, was Murphys slogan as he
deployed the full force of his formidable personality to wake
those left at Old Trafford from the nightmare around them.
Time would take its toll of Jimmys emotions, for the essential
generosity of his spirit could not, any more than the grief, be
concealed for ever. For now the business of football had to
proceed.
Jack Crompton left his coaching job at Luton to return to
help at old Trafford. One of Cromptons first tasks was to
oversee the unpacking of the skip containing the playing kit
from the Red Star game. Jack did a brilliant job after the
crash, Nobby Stiles vouches. His enthusiasm lifted us. He
brought weights and different routines. The club had to go on
and without Jimmy and Jack it wouldnt have.
Nobby was still on the ground staff. He remembers opening
the skip retrieved from the scene of the crash: My job was to
clean the boots. It was a heavy, shitty pitch and the boots were
full of caked mud. When Ifinished I asked Jack if I could keep
Tommy Taylors boots as a memento. He said, OK. I kept
them for years, then I gave them to the club museum.
239
The Football Association allowed United to postpone their
fifth round FA Cup-tie until 19 February. Jimmy Murphy 
considered signing Ferenc Puskas, by now playing for Real
Madrid and earning 800 a week in Spain. The maximum wage
in England was 17 a week. Jimmy concluded that the Puskas
idea was impractical. Instead he turned to Ernie Taylor,
regarded by most informed judges of professional soccer as the
|

real inspiration behind Blackpools FA Cup victory in 1953.
The 53 Final was remembered in folklore as Matthewss
Final, but Murphy knew Taylor had been the player who made
the difference. United paid 8,000 for the thirty-three-year-old
midfield general. Paddy McGrath, who knew Taylor through
his Blackpool connections, helped Murphy complete the deal.
Murphy was also keen to sign Stan Crowther, Aston Villas
hard-tackling wing-half whod proved a tough opponent at
Wembley the previous May. Crowther was not so keen. Villa
Manager, Eric Houghton, persuaded the player to travel with
him to Manchester to watch the Sheffield Wednesday tie, and
Murphy went to meet them in the Midland Hotel. Four hours
before kick-off Jimmys Welsh fervour changed Crowthers
mind. The deal cost United 23,000. Crowther was cup-tied,
having played for Villa in the third round; his boots were in
Birmingham. Eric Houghton sent for the boots and the
Football Association agreed to waive their rule in relation to
cup-tied players. Stan Crowthers boots arrived at seven
oclock.
There were 59,848 people inside Old Trafford when the gates
were closed. Several thousand more stood silently outside. The
atmosphere inside the ground was strange; some wept, others
shrieked the names of those who had died at Munich, most
waited hushed for the teams to appear. The match programme
carried a message from Harold Hardman on its cover. Under
the heading UNITED WILL Go on Hardman wrote:

On 6th February 1958 an aircraft returning from Belgrade
crashed at Munich Airport. Of the twenty-one passengers
who died, twelve were players or officials of the
Manchester United Football Club. Many others lie injured.
It is the sad duty of us who serve Manchester United, to
240
offer our heartfelt sympathy and condolences. Here is a
tragedy which will sadden us for years to come. But in this
we are not alone. An unprecedented blow to British
football has touched the hearts of millions and we express
our deep gratitude to many who have sent messages of
sympathy and floral tributes. Wherever football is played
United is mourned, but we rejoice that many of our party
have been spared and wish them a speedy and complete
recovery. Words are inadequate to describe our thanks and
appreciation of the truly magnificent work of the surgeons
and nurses of the Rechts der Isar Hospital at Munich. But
for their superb skill and deep compassion our casualties
would have been greater. To Professor Georg Maurer we
offer our eternal gratitude. Although we mourn our dead
and grieve for our wounded we believe that our great days
are not done for us. The sympathy and encouragement of
the Football world, and particularly our supporters, will
justify and inspire us. The road back may be long and hard
but with the memory of those who died at Munich, of their
stirring achievements and wonderful sportsmanship ever
with us. .. MANCHESTER UNITED WILL RISE
AGAIN.

H. P. Hardman

Jimmy Murphy had been unable to give a team to the
programme editor earlier that day, so the spaces where the
United team should have been named remained blank. The
team announced on the Tannoy system just before kick-off was:

Gregg
Foulkes Greaves
Goodwin Cope Crowther
Webster Taylor Dawson Pearson Brennan

Bill Foulkes captained the side; Harry Gregg, the hero of the
Munich tragedy, followed immediately behind as the team took
the field. The crowd erupted at the poignant sight of these two
men,. their presence underwriting the words Hardman had
written in the programme. The day after the crash Foulkes and
Gregg had returned to the airfield to collect some personal
241
belongings. Foulkes had found Eddie Colmans scarf and cap
amid the snow-covered wreckage. Now life resumed. Old
Trafford on the night of 19 February 1958 bore more resemb-
lance to a shrine than a football ground.
The side that turned out alongside Foulkes and Gregg
contained two debutants from the A team: Shay Brennan, a
wing-half converted to outside-left for the night and Mark
Pearson, plucked from the youth team. The reluctant Crowther
and the veteran Taylor joined five reserve team players to
complete Uniteds line-up. Sheffield Wednesday fielded a
strong side including England Internationals Tony Kay, Peter
Swan, Redfern Froggatt, and Albert Quixall, one of the games
outstanding young players, who captained the team. The
visitors were overwhelmed by the emotion of the occasion. The
team that perished at Munich had struggled to beat Wednesday
2-1 acouple of months previously. Murphys scratch team won
3-0. Brennan scored direct from a corner in the twenty-seventh
minute, added a second with half-an-hour to go and Alex
Dawson ensured Uniteds place in the sixth round a few
minutes from the end of an extraordinary night.
Two days later in Munich Duncan Edwards died.
Jimmy Murphy took the United players to Blackpool the
following week where, except for weekends at home, they
stayed for the rest of the season. If United were to go on it
would have to be away from Manchester and Old Trafford, the
city still grieving, the ground still occupied by voices and faces
of men whose loss was still almost unbearably shocking.
Especially during the week where, in dressing-room, training-
ground and in matches out the back the ghosts of Tosher and
_ Bert, Eddie Colman and Roger Byrne lingered tormentingly.
And for no one more than Jimmy who ten years later explained:
Even now the heartache is still there. The memory never fades.
If I close my eyes and meditate I can still see them playing.
A lesser man left to save another football club could have
been excused for indulging the sorrow Murphy experienced in
the weeks after Munich. There is no more remarkable testi-
mony. to the work Matt Busby had all but completed before the
Munich tragedy than Jimmy Murphys unflinchingly coura-
geous commitment to the task he now faced.
242
aa _ Matt and Jimmy were never personally close, but they
_ understood each other. What they shared was a love of the
game and pride in what they had achieved at Old Trafford.
They also shared values which, although-ostensibly irrelevant
to professional soccer, had formed the club theyd built
together. Both were family men and United was a family club.
Both of them were decent, paternal, each placing great store on
loyalty. Uniteds success had encouraged other clubs to covet
Jimmy, yet hed never seriously considered any of the offers.
He was happy to serve Busbys cause because it was his too.
Both men had played in the pre-war game and dreamed of
something better, and that was what they had created at
United. They knew each others strengths and weaknesses.
Matts patience and cunning, his football-worldliness was
perfectly compatible with Jimmys evangelical passion. Jimmy
drove United at a certain fundamental level, Matt steered from
the bridge; Matt found it difficult to express emotion, Jimmy
impossible not to do so.
John Giles recalls a typical Murphy scene during a reserve
game at Elland Road: We were playing Leeds and it was 44 at
half-time. There was a lad called Barry Smith playing at the
back for us whod had aterrible first half. Jimmy gave us a right
bollocking: What the fucking hell do you think you're playing
at. This fucking team are fucking useless, they havent scored
four goals all fucking year and theyve scored four against us in
the first half. Barry Smith said, Sorry Jimmy. I dont want
your fucking sorry, get out there and fucking play. I dont want
any more of that rubbish again. 
Yet Giles, like all the others who experienced their first taste
of the pro game in this combustible environment, remembers
Jimmy with respect and affection. He was good for me, when
he talked you listened and he invariably made good football
sense. The Boss would speak in general terms, Jimmy was more
specific. Giles also felt Murphys wrath and the basic humanity
from which the harshness was never divorced. I missed a
_penalty in a reserve game at Huddersfield one day. He gave me
a terrible coating in the dressing-room after the match. I was
only a young lad and I was going home to Ireland for the
weekend. He must have sensed how upset I was because 15
243
;

minutes after bollocking me he put his arm round my shoulders
and said, Have a nice weekend and tell your dad I was asking
for him. 
Wilf McGuinness provides further evidence of the co- |
existence of fervour and decency in Jimmys soul: We were
playing a German side in the European Cup out there and
before the game Jimmys saying to me, These bastards did this
inthe war. . . thatinthe war. .. tous. . . toyourparents...
you go out there and remember what they are. . . and then he
stops, pats me on the back and says, God Bless. 
Matt Busby, who never swore, indeed had a genuine distaste
for invective, knew this side of Jimmy and tacitly approved. His
football club couldnt run on dignity alone.
While Busby lay painfully convalescing in Munich, Man-
chester United ran on Murphys raw passion. Everywhere they
played United drew capacity crowds. Their FA Cup run
became a crusade, the hopes of the nation invested in this squad
of footballers, distinguished only by the red shirts they wore. A
disproportionate share of the burden fell on the shoulders of
Bobby Charlton, a nineteen-year-old rookie pre-Munich, now
the principal source of Manchester Uniteds inspiration.
Coaxed by Murphy, Bobby delivered magnificently. Less than
a month after the crash Charlton returned to face West Brom in
the sixth round of the FA Cup at The Hawthorns.
West Brom were one of the best sides in the country. They
had beaten the Red Devils 4-3 at this venue earlier in the
season. Vic Buckingham, their manager, promised to show no
mercy for the new United. We will win six nil, he promised.
United defied this prediction drawing 22 having come close to
victory. The replay at Old Trafford was scoreless until a minute
from time when Ernie Taylor found Bobby Charlton on the
right. The quiet kid of a month ago swerved with elusive
power past four defenders before slipping the ball across the
face of the goal to present Colin Webster with a simple chance.
Uniteds semi-final victory over Fulham followed another
pulsating replay. Charlton scored Uniteds two goals in the
drawn game at Villa Park, and another in the 53 win that
secured their place in another Wembley Final. Alex Dawson
scored a hat-trick in this replayed FA Cup semi-final less than a
244
year after appearing inthe FA Youth Cup Final. Shay Brennan
scored the fifth United goal, his A team days a bare couple of
months behind him. Shay was twenty. A decade before hed
almost fallen under the coach bearing the 48 team home
triumphantly from Wembley. He found it hard to believe that
this time hed be on the bus.
After the cup-tie Manchester United retreated to Blackpool.
The promise to go on was sensationally fulfilled. Viewed from
Blackpool, the reality of spring 1958, the dreadfully poignant |
fusion of tragedy and triumph, seemed hazy. Bobby Charlton
has no rational memory of those weeks: I never saw the whole
thing in context, he says. With replays and the backlog of
fixtures caused by the crash we seemed to have a game every
three days. Jimmy kept our minds on football. He just said
weve got to keep the club going and thats really what the Cup
run meant. We were almost proving to ourselves that Man-
chester United was alive. Even now Bobby cannot talk about
the tragedy. When its mentioned, a couple of hours into the
story of the pre-Munich club he so vividly describes as
paradise, emotion wells in his body, his eyes detach from
yours, unwilling to betray their hurt.
Like Murphy and Charlton, Harry Gregg and Bill Foulkes
found solace by practising their craft in the desperate weeks
after Munich. If they worked like men possessed it was because
they were.
For Jackie Blanchflower and others there was no refuge from
appalling reality. Jackie arrived back in England the afternoon
of the semi-final against Fulham. It was six weeks after the
crash. I came back with my wife, Jean, on the Belgrade Express
and then by ship to Dover. The club sent a taxi to bring us to
Manchester and the driver had the semi-final on the radio. I
didnt want to listen to it. When I got home the replay was on
television but I switched it off. It wasnt Manchester United to
me.
Manchester United was the friends hed left behind. Its hard
- to explain to people who havent been through it. I lost the will
to play again. I can understand the Liverpool players after
Hillsborough, John Aldridge saying he didnt care if he played
again. When you lose people near and dear to you in a tragedy
245
|
like that you lose your passion for the game. Tommy Taylor was
the worst blow for me. Ive never made a relationship like that
since.
In Munich the news of fatalities was kept from Matt Busby
for almost a month. Professor Georg Maurer insisted that the
shock of learning about Tom Curry, Bert Whalley, Willie
Satinoff and the players hed led on this great European
adventure might sap his will to fight for his life. Jean, Sheena
and Sandy lived anxiously lest they betray their dreadful secret.
Frank Taylor, the only sports writer to survive the crash,
recounts a visit to Busbys hospital room a month after the
tragedy: Matt was a shattering sight. He lay silent, stretched
full length as though asleep, the plaster on his right leg bulging
the blankets. The bushy, once sandy hair was now grey and
tinged with streaks of white. The eyes opened in recognition;
the pale waxy face which belonged to a man of seventy
brightened; a thin pitifully emaciated hand advanced haltingly
over the white cover on the bed, found mine-and gripped it
weakly. Hallo, my old pal, how are you, Frank lad?  Within
minutes Busby had lapsed into slumber.
Busby knew that something awful had occurred. Lying
weakly in his bed his powerful instincts still functioned. He
didnt press the questions for in truth he was afraid to know the
answers. Finally it was Jean who broke the news. Sheena and
Sandy listened as Matt held her hand and listed the names of
those whod boarded Flight 609 with him. When he named a
survivor Jean nodded and squeezed his hand. When he asked
for those whod died she shook her head. Words seemed
pointless.
Subsequent claims that Matt Busby decided to quit football
after the Munich air crash are inaccurate. Thinking aloud he
talked to his family about the absurdity of the games obsessive
quest for results and trophies when measured against lifes
realities as they had just experienced them. Understanding
power as he did, Matt Busby also reflected on his decision to
seek the glory of European football, his defiance of those who
argued against the new idea. He had been impatient, resenting
the timid, narrow-minded counsels of caution. Europe had
been his vision. This thought prompted reproach. However, on
246
reflection, he recalled his young teams enthusiasm for the
challenge hed posed them, their hunger for the new experi-
ence, their desire to fulfil themselves beyond the parochial
English game. They could have been the best in the world, but
not unless they went in search of Real Madrid and others like
the Hungarians of mythology. That was what he wanted, the
dream his players shared.
Thus, remorse gave way to deep, abiding sadness. On 19
April 1958 Matt Busby left Rechts der Isar Hospital to return
home. That afternoon Bobby Charlton marked his debut for
England against Scotland at Hampden Park, with a spectacular
goal volleyed from a Tom Finney cross. The same day Billy
Meredith died in Manchester aged eighty-three. Professional
soccers first great star died almost destitute. During his last
years Meredith eked out an existence with small donations from
the Professional Footballers Association. Thanks to Matt
Busby and United he kept a roof over his head. He had met
Duncan Edwards, Tommy Taylor and Eddie Colman who had
called to see him to pay their respects. The Wizard and the Red
Devils had much in common. Like him their hearts were
always full of football. They died on a maximum wage of 17 per
week, less in real terms than Billy had earned fifty years before.
In newspapers dominated by Matt Busbys return home and
Bobby Charltons stunning debut for England, the passing of
professional footballs first hero was a small story. He would
have understood, for nobody knew better the nature of the
glory game.

Manchester United were in the FA Cup Final. Old Trafford was
curiously still when Jackie Blanchflower went back a couple of
weeks before the great event. There was much on his mind. He
went to see the new club secretary, Les Olive, about one
relatively minor matter. Jackie had encountered an Irish
construction worker in Belgrade whod saved some money he
wanted to send to his family in Belfast. He gave Jackie the
equivalent of 48 in Yugoslav currency asking him to convert
the money to sterling and post it on when he returned home.
Walter Crickmer had run out of Yugoslav dinars so Jackie had
given Uniteds secretary the Irishmans money agreeing to
247
collect the 48 when he returned. Jackie explained the situation
to Les Olive, who of course knew nothing about the arrange- 
ment. Jackie was unable to claim the money back, but sent 48
to the mans family anyway. Life had gone on.
Stan Crowther caught Jackies eye: I heard him effing and
blinding and I thought to myself, you wont last long when the
Boss gets back, says Jackie. He didnt. Crowther was hot-
tempered and profane even by dressing-room standards. Hed
caused a couple of fights in training, on one occasion crunching
Ernie Taylor to the ground ina practice match; another day, at
Davyhulme Golf Club, he smashed a snooker cue in pieces on
the green baize after missing a simple shot.
The week before the Cup Final Matt Busby returned to the
ground. The staff gathered in Ted Daltons medical room. The
Boss wanted to say a few words. He planned to say, as Harold
Hardman had, that United would go on. He looked old, Wilf
McGuinness thought, as if hed been through hell. Before the
crash hed looked so strong, like a man whod never suffered,
now the suffering showed.
With Jimmy Murphy and Jack Crompton on either side of
him, Busby began to speak. A word or two came out, then he
broke down. Sobbing, he allowed Jimmy and Jack to help him
from the room.
Paddy McGrath, his close friend for over forty years remem-
bers his first meeting with Matt after the Munich air crash. He
was always very careful with his emotions, you wouldnt know
what he felt. I'd gone to his house to see how he was one
afternoon. It was a nice spring day and Matt was sitting out in
the garden. He was stillin a bad way. . . but he got up as I came
across to him. We just hugged each other. There were tears in
his eyes. But he said nothing. Never did talk about the crash.
But it was always there. In his eyes. Always.
14
Another Story
Before Munich it was Manchesters
club, afterwards everyone felt they
owned alittle bit of it.
Bobby Charlton

The family passed into legend. Bolton had beaten United in the
1958 Cup Final. The five-week gap between semi-final and
Wembley had left the driven team too much time for reflection.
The return of Matt Busby, the sight of him breaking down in the
treatment-room, had exposed the illusion of glorious survival
masked by the victories over Sheffield Wednesday, West Brom
and Fulham. Wembley on Cup Final day seemed appallingly
incongruous to Harry Gregg. Fate rubbed salt in the wounds.
Nat Lofthouse put Bolton in front after three minutes. The
decisive second goal was a source of bitter controversy. Gregg
parried a shot which he gathered at the second attempt, then
Nat Lofthouse barged into him from behind, this dubious
challenge causing the ball to slip out of his grasp over the line.
Fate could perhaps have been forgiven. The men who
governed English football are another matter. They hadnt
changed. Manchester United were due to play AC Milan in the
first leg of the European Cup semi-final at Old Trafford on the
Wednesday after the Cup Final. The Football Association
insisted that this game be played without the assistance of
Bobby Charlton, Uniteds best player. He was required for a
friendly international against Portugal at Wembley. It says
much for Uniteds residue of courage that they beat Milan 2-1.
But this slender advantage was not enough, and the adventure
that began in such magnificent style with the 60 victory over
Shamrock Rovers in Dublin the previous September before
being tragically disrupted at Munich finally ended in a 4-0
249
0 in
defeat in the second leg of the semi-final in Milan. Playing for |
his country at Wembley, his heart elsewhere, Bobby Charlton
scored the winning goal with an explosive shot from thirty
ards.
: The following month Matt received the CBE for services to
English soccer. In July, perhaps regretting the callous indif- |

ference to Uniteds plight they had demonstrated by demand-
ing Charltons services against Portugal, the Football Associa-
tion granted the club permission to accept UEFAs invitation to
participate in the following seasons European Champions
Cup, but English footballs other controlling authority, the
Football League, protested. Wolves were the champions and
according to Football League rules Manchester United were
ineligible. This brutally insensitive decision was taken by the
Leagues Management Committee, a body composed of club
chairmen. Esteemed across the world, loved by the games
fans, their dreadful tragedy lamented in every home in Britain,
Manchester United could not command any sympathy from the
merchants who ruled the professional game. The laws were
what mattered. Busby appealed  successfully  to the Football
Association. The Football League remained firm. A major row
broke out which wasnt finally resolved until a joint FA/League
commission found against United. Matt Busby had always been
a believer in the rules, but this particular application of football
law, a few months after the Munich Air Crash had torn the
heart out of his club, did nothing to reinforce his faith.
The years that followed were desperate ones for Matt Busby,
CBE. It was a bad time for paternalism, on which Busbys
vision of a football club was founded. His vision of the game
itself was rooted in the same principle. Freedom and respect for
the individual in order that he may serve the family better. Now
people wanted to look after themselves, do their own thing.
Manchester United football was about doing your own thing 
up to a point. You were free to express yourself as a footballer
but you had obligations as well: to the team, to the club and to
the rules governing football which Busby presided over as
humanely as he could. There was a paradox here; the great
believer in individualism demanding that his men conform to
the greater good, be obliged to serve loyally the
250
common cause which was Manchester United. This wasnt
simply Busbys paradox or his clubs, it was the riddle at the
heart of the game of professional soccer. Each player was
different, each season presented its own problems, each match,
each day; every time you went to work some adjustment was
required, a subtle tilting of the scales was necessary, every
nuance must constantly be observed. That was football man-
agement and Matt Busby understood it better than anyone.
The Boss understood people better than anyone, footballers
at least.
The Sixties were challenging for him on a number of fronts.
Munich had left him scarred more profoundly than the physical
marks allowed. The man who defined the managers role by
putting on his tracksuit and working with his players was now
office-bound or confined to the edge of the training ground, but
when he appeared, whether tracksuited or not, the charismatic
presence still worked. At least for those of us who were young
like George Best, David Sadler, Johnny Astons son  young
John  Tony Dunne who was alittle older and Nobby Stiles,
then trying to break into the first team. Like Wilf McGuinness,
now youth team trainer, and Bobby Charlton before us, we
wanted to show him on the odd occasion he came out.
The training ground bore reminders of the past. Most aspects
of daily life contained their share of melancholy. He saw faces
where once theyd been, heard the voices, the laughter and the
banter of the great days when for a while the game seemed easy.
Even the journalists he dealt with touched a nerve. David Meek
of the Manchester Evening News where old Tom Jackson had
been, Peter Slingsby instead of Alf Clarke. And no Henry
Rose, the rogue with a vitriolic pen and a warm heart. Rose was
the quintessential Manchester character, sceptical, funny,
earthy and warm. On the day of the Express mans funeral
Manchesters one thousand taxi drivers had offered their
services free to mourners and the cortege had stretched six
miles back. Matt was always wary of journalists, anxious to
avoid unpleasant publicity, and despite the occasional incident
the eight press men who died at Munich had played the game
with him. They played to his rules, they belonged to his -
generation, had served in the war, known the hard times. The
251
do
ne

new men were a different breed, less amenable to flattery and
the little tit-bit of exclusivity his pals from the past nibbled
gratefully. They had to be watched.
Busby had decided to spend big to rebuild quickly. He didnt
feel he had time on his side. He was in his fifties, physically and
emotionally tired. The Munich side had burst on the scene,
causing people to believe that a miracle had been worked. He
knew how long the process had been, the best part of ten years
had elapsed between Roger Byrnes arrival and the flowering of
that side. Jackie Blanchflower and Mark Jones had come to Old
Trafford in 1949, Johnny Berry in 51. Even the youngest 
Duncan, Eddie and Tommy Taylor  had been at the club five to
six years before the chemistry had begun to work the way he
envisaged. Now he didnt have the time, the aorteyor even the
will to start out again.
Prudence would have to be abandoned. Expensive players
would demand high wages. Schoolboys were asking outrageous
signing-on fees which he was having to pay under the counter.
Matt had, as Harold Riley observed, always known what he
was. Now he wasnt so sure. Rileys man of great principle was
tarnished. Given the values prevalent in professional soccer as
the Sixties began to swing he had no option if he wished to serve
his club. Control of himself and the working environment
around him had always been his secret. It was more difficult
now.
This bothered him, on occasions causing torment. Some-
times the frustration showed. In early 61, with the maximum
wage about to be removed, things looked particularly black.
United lost 72 at home to Sheffield Wednesday in a replayed
fourth round FA Cup tie. The first game at Hillsborough had.
been a 1-1 draw; this humiliation at Old Trafford was a shock.
Busbys reservations about the transfer-market remained
yet it was obvious as well that youngsters like Pearson, Alex
Dawson and Jimmy Nicholson, all of whom played in this game,
werent good enough. The following week United played
Leicester in the League at Filbert Street.
Sitting in his usual seat, the first one on the coach, by the
door, Matt could hear the card-school a few rows back. On
coach or train he always appeared to be in another world. He
252
| wasnt. He listened and observed, judging character, working
out who was influential, who was strong, who was weak, who
was honest, mean or generous. He told Paddy McGrath that
sometimes he learned more sitting there than watching games.
On the way to Leicester there was a brag school. They were
playing for big stakes, a weeks wages, more, changing hands at
the turn of card. Matt hated high-stakes gambling in the club,
not least because he believed it could affect a players per-
formance on the pitch.
The anger of the 7-2 Cup defeat in his mind, he sat raging as
the coach pulled up at Filbert Street. He had been in the
dressing-room for five minutes before he realised that the card
players were still on the bus. Jack Crompton went out to get
them. Busby said nothing. United lost 60. Afterwards he kept
his head, and went to the boardroom for his scotch before
returning to the bus for the journey home. They were at it
again, animated bidding in fancy amounts. Matt got up from his
seat, walked deliberately back to the card-table, picked up the
deck of cards and flung them out of the window of the speeding
bus. The high-stakes gambling would stop. Right now.
Gambling being his own secret vice, Matt knew only too well
how it felt to lose heavily. This compounded his anger.

George Best arrived in the summer of 1961, one of that years
intake of talented fifteen-year-olds. I had joined United in
another batch the previous year. We were lucky. All young lads
dreamed of playing for Manchester United, inspired by the
same vision that had seduced Bobby Charlton, Nobby Stiles
and the great young players who died at Munich. Alas, the club
we joined was different, although not to innocent eyes like
ours.
Matt Busby had been at Old Trafford for fifteen years. His
two great sides were founded on certain principles: decent
behaviour which allowed that. professional footballers were
human beings entitled to respect; pure football based on the
individual skills and imagination of those people; talent that
would blossom the more if character was allowed to develop in
an environment free of profanity and bullying. The kind of
professional footballers he wanted at Old Trafford were made
253
not born, or bought. From those values a sense of identity |
created which was distinct to the Busby family. This was
paternalism, Busby the father-figure, his own values and 
experience reflected in his football club. Those like Johnny 
Morris and Charlie Mitten who questioned too much or were
disloyal had to go. Few were adopted: Jimmy Delaney bought
for the 48 team, a Scot from Celtic, one of Matts own; Johnny
Dewnie, another Scot from Lanark up the road from Bellshill,
Johnny Berry and Tommy Taylor for the Red Devils,
specialists bought to plug the odd gap in the system.
Remarkably Matt Busby did not buya single player between
March 1953, when twenty-one-year-old Tommy Taylor came
from Barnsley, and November 1957 when another specialist,
Harry Gregg, was purchased from Doncaster. He believed that
he could make players, and the record proved that this was no
idle conceit. Moreover, Busby was convinced that players
whose characters were formed elsewhere in the professional
game could not be reconstructed to conform with the values
prevailing at Old Trafford. His experience in the post-Munich
era confirmed these views.
In September 1958 United bought Albert Quixall from
Sheffield Wednesday for a British record fee of 45,000.
Sheenas husband, Don Gibson, a Wednesday player, was a 
frequent weekend visitor to the Busby household. Week after
week Gibson raved about Quixall, a gifted technician whod
played five times for England. Assured that Quixall was the
right type, Busby took the gamble. When he travelled to
Sheffield to complete the business he was shocked by
Wednesdays price. The press had been alerted and gathered
outside Hillsborough. Inside, Wednesdays shrewd general
manager, Eric Taylor, whod leaked the story to the press,
informed Matt that the player would cost 45,000. Busbys
prudence got the better of him and he refused to close the deal.
He worried about the press outside. Tell them you cant afford
it, Taylor joked.
The truth was Busby felt United couldnt afford 45,000. This
view was shared by Harold Hardman, his chairman. The club
had been hopelessly under-insured for the players killed and
permanently injured at Munich. As well as the eight who died,
254
i
_ Jackie Blanchflower and Johnny Berry were finished with
football. Thrift was fundamental to Busbys nature and,
contrary to the idea implicit in Eric Taylors joke, United was
not a wealthy club. When Busby returned to Manchester it was
to Louis Edwards rather than Harold Hardman he turned for
guidance. Hardman would have counselled prudence; Edwards
encouraged Matt to take the gamble. Busby returned to
Sheffield, accompanied, significantly, by Edwards, to sign
Quixall for the record fee demanded.
Time would show the Quixall signing to be a mistake, both
for United and for the player. Quickie was a nice man, gentle,
funny, extrovert, nothing like the dour Yorkshireman of
popular repute. Sadly, this talented inside-forward didnt have
the stomach for battle demanded of those who pulled on
Jimmys red shirts. In the vernacular of the professional game
Albert was a cheat lacking the competitive edge necessary at a
club competing for high honours. Bought to lead the revival of
Englands most renowned football club for a fee commensurate
to that task, Albert Quixall ended up suffering a nervous
breakdown.
United had finished runners-up to Wolves in season 58/59.
The men responsible belonged to the pre-crash era. Harry
Gregg, Bill Foulkes, Albert Scanlon, Denis Viollet, Wilf
McGuinness and, more than anyone, Bobby Charlton. Bobby
scored twenty-nine goals; Wilf missed only three games,
establishing himself at left-half and winning an England cap.
Old virtues did not disappear overnight.
In December 1959 Wilf McGuinness broke his leg. For
several weeks he had been playing through pain in his shin-
bone, though X-rays had revealed no abnormality. He couldnt
train but continued to play after spending his week on the
treatment table. His form suffered and along with three other
internationals  Gregg, Charlton and the former England
amateur Warren Bradley  he was dropped. Desperate to
regain his place, Wilf sought painkilling injections from the club
doctor. Cortisone was drilled into his leg either side of the
troublesome shinbone to enable Wilf to play against Stoke in a
reserve match at Old Trafford. I went into the first tackle which
was perfectly straightforward and my leg broke like a twig, he
255
recalls. Id had astress fracture all along but in those days they
didnt have the equipment to do scans. ;
Matt Busby bought Maurice Setters from West Brom to
replace McGuinness for a transfer fee of 30,000. Setters was a
hard man whod turned down moves to Everton and Man-
chester City before United moved for him. He signed within ten
minutes of meeting Busby, declaring himself thrilled at the
prospect of playing for Manchester United. Setters would
prove to be a more serious mistake than Quixall. Burnley won
the Championship that season, United finished seventh.
In November Matt Busby bought Noel Cantwell, West
Hams elegant Irish international left-back, for 30,000. United
needed a leader, someone of Johnny Carey or Roger Byrnes
calibre, and Cantwell looked the part. Noel was a tall,
handsome, intelligent man, composed and imposing on the
field, capable of commanding respect in the dressing-room.
Cantwell thought the place was a joke. His first few weeks in
Manchester were spent in a hotel while he found a house for his
family. In the afternoons he trained with us round the back
with Jack Crompton in charge. Johnny Aston was back at the
club as youth team coach. The training was more or less the
same as before Munich. Jack had introduced a couple of
variations: a few. weights and some _ bodywork
exercises, basic stuff like tummies (stomach exercises) and
what might be called physical jerks. Then everyone went round
the back for the five-a-side or twenty-a-side, depending on the
numbers. George Best was unbelievable round the back. He
was skinny, dark and quiet as a mouse, but this street game was
life to him. Here, in between the railway fence and the
concrete, he did things wed never seen before. And we were
the cream of young footballers in the British Isles, plus the first
team and promising young men like Nobby Stiles, John Giles
and Jimmy Nicholson, who everyone thought was the new
Duncan Edwards.
Sometimes getting a kick was difficult. There was so much
passion that fights would break out when someone was knocked
to the cinder-strewn ground or crushed against the concrete
wall. Harry Gregg and Bill Foulkes were particularly
256
dangerous. Big Greggie was daft. He always wanted to play
out  of goal that is  and of course he was fucking hopeless.
The boys would take the piss out of him, teasing with the ball,
maybe nutmegging him and then sniggering. Harry would
chase the ball like a headless chicken, temper rising all the time.
The favourite joke was to pass the ball to somebody to allow
Harry to catch the victim in possession. Whoever got caught hit
the deck  or one of the boundary walls  suffering the wrath of
Harrys cumulative frustrations.
Foulkesy was just a bully. He seemed to enjoy knocking
kids down. Popular Bill, or PB as he was known, left the pits at
St Helens aged twenty. Miners were hard men was his
message. He hated Harry, who felt the same about him, though
no one was quite sure why this mutual dislike existed. It
probably had something to do with Munich, that day on the
airfield after the crash. The papers had described them both as
heroes yet Harry would claim privately that you should have
seen that big fucker run. Conversely Bill probably resented
Harrys implicit (occasionally overt) projection of himself as
the keeper of the pre-Munich faith. Hed only been at the cluba
few weeks before the crash.
By the time I arrived in 1960 Munich was history. Nobody
mentioned it. The clock on the wall over the forecourt bore the
_ words February 6th 1958. That was all. This was a modest and,
it seemed, entirely appropriate memorial. There was no need
for an ostentatious memorial, the grief was profound. But it was
not our grief, rather Bobbys, The Bosss, Jimmys, the grief of
those whod belonged to another club.
One afternoon Noel Cantwell started chatting to me in the
bath after training. Is that it? he asked of the training routine. I
told him it was. He was incredulous. I was Irish, he could
confide in me. Doesnt anybody ever talk about the game here?
Why isnt the training organised . . . what about ball-work. . .
do you ever see Busby . . . doesnt anyone think about the
game. Was that it? A bit of running, head-tennis and round the
- back for a bloody free-for-all. The frustration poured out of
him. He shook his head in disbelief as I assured him that, yes,
that was it and no, there wasnt much talking about the game.
I was only a kid. Noel assured me that the first team
257
preparations were the same. Busby just came in, talked in
generalisations and said go out and enjoy yourself. Keep it
simple, give it to a red shirt. Give it to a fucking red shirt,
Cantwell exclaimed. You dont need a manager for that. How
do you find a red shirt if you havent worked on it and talked
about it?
Noel had ideas. New ideas. Hed come from West Ham
where he was the leader of a group of players who were
questioning the way the game was played in England. The
Great Debate of the early Fifties had developed, new ways of
training were discussed, players had to be fitter, more tactically
aware, you had to think about the game and talk about it. At
West Ham Cantwell was the professor. Malcolm Allison, John
Bond, Jimmy Andrews, Frank OFarrell and Malcolm
Musgrave would join him in an Italian cafe round the corner
from Upton Park to discuss the game. This gathering would
later acquire national fame as the West Ham Academy.
A revolution was taking place in English football, on and off
the field. In 1961 the maximum wage was abolished after
George Eastham took his case to the High Court. Eastham, a
gifted footballer with an independent mind, challenged the
legality of the Slaves Charter and won. It was to take another
two decades to get rid of the retain-and-transfer system,
meanwhile the concession of maximum wages was the compro-
mise accepted by the Masters. They fought hard to keep the
Slaves in place, but Eastham and Jimmy Hill, supported by Cliff
Lloyds Professional Footballers Association, had right on
their side. Newspapers, notably the Observer, facilitated
debate. Queens Counsel was enlisted to examine the contracts
which had governed professionals lives since the Edwardian
era. The QCs laughed. Billy Meredith was vindicated, alas too
late for him. Newspapers werent unanimous, nor, astonish-
ingly, were the professionals, a significant minority of whom
felt, as in The Wizards day, that we are lucky to be doing what
we do and getting paid for it.
But Bob Dylan was on the road, the Beatles were in the
charts, Jack Kennedy was in the White House and free love was
on the agenda. The times they were a-changing and the
maximum wage was blown away by the winds of change.
258
esti
ee
Shs
The West Ham Academy was of its time. Others in football
were thinking and talking as well. Burnley won the Champion-
ship in 1960 playing cultured Continental-style football under -
Jimmy Adamson, their captain, and Jimmy Mcllroy, their
gracious, articulate schemer. The following season Spurs won
the Double. This historic achievement was gained in style, a
victory for the thinking professional epitomised by Spurs
captain Danny Blanchflower, Jackie Blanchflowers elder
brother. Professional football appeared to be emerging from its
Dark Age  the only Age it had ever known  in those early
Sixties years. Blanchflowers Spurs, followed enthusiastically by
philosophy don Freddie Ayer, symbolised the New Age. At
United Cantwell was representative of the new, cerebral,
professional game. Thought had become afact of professional
football life. Coaching had begun.
This is the most fascinating period in the history of the
English game. Reflecting society at large, as it always had done,
professional soccer allowed its best and brightest to have their
say. Ignorance was the enemy; thought and freedom of
expression would broaden horizons. The reactionaries who had
dominated professional soccer in England were now fully
exposed to the light of rational discourse. Men like Blanch-
flower, Cantwell, Allison and their followers were eager to
learn from the Hungarians and Real Madrid who had won the
European Cup for six successive years playing glorious football.
In 1958 Brazil with Pele had won the World Cup, England
finished nowhere once again.
The new men knew what was wrong, there was no argument
now about the best football in the world. That was a joke.
According to consensus, the answer to English footballs
problems lay on the training ground. That was where players
were improved, skills developed, fitness raised to new levels.
The training ground should offer education, thought translated
into action, you should work with the ball, always with the ball,
thats how the Continentals did it, they always had the ball. And
they were organised. The wonderful football Real Madrid
played didnt just happen.
This was why Cantwell was so shocked when he arrived at
Old Trafford. From afar Matt Busbys Manchester United had
259
, |
seemed a beacon of enlightenment. United had done it, played
the football of the new mens dreams. Hence Cantwells
disillusion with the club he found himself leading on the field.
Busby appeared to provide nothing but platitudes about sim-
plicity and the importance of character. The fundamental |
disagreement between Busby and the school of which Noel
Cantwell was representative was about the means to the end
both desired. Could you plan good football or was it the product
of the individuals imagination, great teams being those where
the best players gelled instinctively to create a chemical unique
to themselves rather than a formula that could be learned and
passed on? The West Ham Academy believed in footballs
virtues, the positive, but once you started to think rationally
about football what was negative became apparent.
In 1962 Alf Ramseys Ipswich won the Championship. Alf
Ramsey had thought about his team and come to the conclusion
that his players werent good enough to compete, in any
positive sense, with their betters. His response was a formula
which stopped good footballers playing. Ipswich were
organised. United finished fifteenth in the First Division.
Ramseys team won 4-1 at Portman Road; United, on one of
their few happy days that season, beat the champions-elect 50
at Old Trafford. Albert Quixall scored a hat-trick. In the same
year United reached the FA Cup semi-final, losing to Spurs. At
Leeds Don Revie was also thinking deeply about football. In
1963 Leeds won the Second Division, and United finished
nineteenth in the First Division having narrowly avoided
relegation. At Wembley Manchester United won the FA Cup
beating Leicester City 3-1 with a scintillating display of
football. David Herd scored twice, Denis Law once, a brilliant
swivel and shot setting up Uniteds victory. Paddy Crerand
played superbly in midfield for United. The turbulent contra-
dictions evident in Manchester Uniteds fortunes on the field in
1963 reflected life in the dressing-room that season and,
indeed, in the three preceeding years.
Manchester United was in transition, and nobody was sure
exactly where the club was heading. The shambles of the
League performances was indicative of the mess the club was
in, but the magic of Wembley proved that Matt Busby was alive
260
ier
and well, still the great conjuror with tricks to play. The game
had changed, his club had changed and so to some extent had
he.
After Cantwell Busby bought David Herd, son of his old
friend and City colleague Alec, for 38,000. In 1962 he broke
the British transfer record again to buy Denis Law from Torino
for 115,000. Paddy Crerand followed from Celtic for 55,000.
United were big spenders now. The old network of scouts still
existed, Joe Armstrong still charmed mothers, but Miraculous
Medals were not sufficient to turn the trick these days. Parents
had started thinking rationally as well. Nobby Stiles had come
to Old Trafford because he loved United; Kenny Morton, the
best schoolboy footballer in England was keen to come to
United. And because of the clubs renown his parents only
wanted five grand, which was less than others were offering.
Things having changed since Johnny Morriss day  and Charlie
Mittens  the Mortons got their money. Kenny never made it,
leaving United for York City, ona free transfer, where he made.
nine appearances in 1965. He subsequently played three games
for Darlington. Kenny was a nice lad, a vegetarian whose
special meals were prepared in the digs. Barry Fry, the England
schoolboy of his year, joined with me in 1960. United gave his
dad a scouting job and a lump sum to come to Old Trafford. His
dad never found any talent.
Billy Behan found Tony Dunne playing for Shelbourne in the
League of Ireland. Tony cost 6,000 in one of the best deals
United ever did. The old way still worked, but it was a back-up
system to the more profligate norm of the post-Munich club.
David Sadler cost 750 from Maidstone. Hed been a sensation
in the England amateur team but no more than a curiosity when
he arrived at Old Trafford in February 1963. David moved into
digs with George Best at Mrs Fullaways.
The abolition of the maximum wage cast everyone in
professional football into the unknown. With the ceiling of 20
a week removed, the sky was the limit when negotiations began
in the summer of 1961. The showman Tommy Trinder,
Fulhams chairman, had been vocal in support of the players.
Trinders promise to pay his international inside-forward,
Johnny Haynes, 100 a week went down like a lead balloon in
261
most First Division boardrooms. Haynes was after all Fulhams
only star. Matt Busby had a whole squad of internationals to
bargain with. Trinders sum applied to Manchester Uniteds
circumstances would mean arise of sixty or seventy thousand
pounds on the annual wage bill. Given Busbys other money
worries this was unthinkable. His dilemma was more acute;
during the struggle with the Football League he had backed his
players: Its ridiculous what you boys are being paid. You
should be on 100 a week.
Players everywhere speculated. There was a lot of idle talk,
much private worry. How would you know what the others
were getting, would your valuation of yourself vis 4 vis them be
reflected in your offer, how valuable were you to your club? Ina
business already inherently insecure, the maximum wage, for
all its faults, had left everyone certain where they stood. John
Giles was not especially money conscious. Charlie Hurley, who
played for Sunderland, was fond of the folding stuff. On a
close-season trip with the Irish international squad John and
Charlie agreed to compare offers when the letters arrived. Giles
was one of Uniteds most gifted young players. Hed played
twenty-three games that season. He was offered 25 a week
plus 5 appearance money. Nobby Stiles, with whom John
lodged in Collyhurst, enjoyed the same status at Old Trafford
and received the same offer. When they turned up for pre-
season training Uniteds players discovered, after some huffing
and bluffing, that all members of the first team squad had been
offered 25 plus a fiver for appearing in the League and some
nominal crowd bonus. Giles rang Charlie Hurley. Charlie was
in bad form. Second Division Sunderlands offer was 60 a
week which he had turned down.
When they checked with players from other clubs Uniteds
stars discovered that theirs was the lowest offer in the First
Division. Most Second Division clubs had offered more.
Liverpool, managed by Matts friend Bill Shankly, were then in
the Second Division, and their offer was the same as Uniteds.
Busby and Shankly had discussed the matter and agreed on the
norm, yet there was no comparison between the clubs other
than their two managers canny natures.
Busbys offer was outrageous, and the players were bitter
262
"when they met to consider what to do. They agreed that nobody
_ would sign the new contracts. Later, Busby saw them in his
Office, one by one. He explained the offer in terms of team spirit
and the clubs finances, dismissing as wild talk the figures being
mentioned elsewhere. He put the contract on the desk and, one
by one, they signed. Big talk in the dressing-room was one
thing, dealing with The Boss in his office was a very different
experience. His presence was overwhelming. You were not
_ confronted, on the contrary, he was charming, solicitous,
understanding your concerns, keen that you should understand
Manchester Uniteds interests as well as your own. He didnt
make you feel bad, he made you feel important, you wanted to
please him, do what was right for everyone, yourself and the
_-club. He -was the club. You signed. And felt like a shit for
causing hassle in the first place. Then you thanked him. On the
way down the stairs you tried to figure out a way to explain to
_ the others what had happened. There were many sheepish-
_ looking hard men around the dressing-room that week.
It is impossible to overstate the importance of his sheer
| physicality in circumstances such as these. Busby was no mere
charmer. He was a huge man, immaculate in manner and dress.
The voice, a deep, soft Scottish brogue, was a force in itself, the
humility Harold Riley alludes to projected as vulnerability.
- There was a sanctity about this person, its power especially
- potent when you were alone with him, something indefinable
yet invisible which, in purely physical terms, amounted to
greatness. Munich had saddened his face perceptibly, the
presence was stronger for that.
Busbys toughness was well known in the dressing-room.
Those who didnt fall under his charismatic spell eventually saw
a glint of steel. In this too he was subtle. An exasperated sigh
was a bad sign. His eyes, never warmly engaged with yours,
would focus coldly as it became clear that ground was not being
conceded on the other side of the desk. There was rarely any
shouting, just the simple observation that if you chose to have it
your way there was nothing Manchester United could  or
would  do. At the end of the day it was your decision. This club
was bigger than anybody.
Once a decision had to be made Busby was swift and ruthless,
263
as Johnny Morris and Charlie Mitten had discovered. Colin
Webster, the wrong type, left in the early Sixties and in 1962,
Denis Viollet was transferred to Stoke on similar grounds.
Viollet had broken Uniteds goalscoring record with thirty-two
League goals in the season 59/60. Hed captained the club and
been close to Busby, as all his captains were, for a while
afterwards. But Denis was too fond of ladies and the Man-
chester night life. After the usual Busby patience was ex-
hausted, Denis, a popular man in the dressing-room, was
exiled. One of the greatest players ever to play for the club,
Viollet may also have suffered delayed reaction to Munich.
Busby sought to replace Viollet with Denis Law. The Scottish
international was known to be unhappy at Torino. After a tip-
off, Busby enquired about a price for a player hed always
admired since seeing him play against United in a youth cup tie
at Huddersfield in the mid Fifties. The price was 115,000, way
beyond the British record in 1962. The deal would place United
in debt for the first time since Busby had arrived in 1945. Harold
Hardman was not sympathetic when Busby broached the
subject. The chairman had been at United since the Newton -
Heath days. He knew the cost of extravagance, remembered
Walter Crickmer returning empty-handed from the bank
unable to pay the players wages. Spending on the transfer-
market had not produced results thus far, Busby was reminded.
Setters, Quixall, Cantwell, and Herd had not transformed
United, nor was there any sign that better days were in the
offing. Thanks to Alan Gibson and Louis Edwards Matt
commanded a majority in the boardroom, but he needed
unanimity to push the club into the red at the bank. For a couple
of days he considered accepting an offer from his friend Johnny
Foy and another Manchester bookie, Ely Rose, to underwrite
the bid for Law. In the end Louis Edwards helped Matt
persuade Hardman, and the three of them set off for a secret
meeting with Denis in Switzerland.
Law was desperate to leave Italy and eager to join United.
Torino, angry at his defiance, now sold his contract to Juventus.
Presented with this fait accompli Denis packed his bags,
returned to Manchester and sat tight for a month. He was
threatened with a worldwide ban if he didnt abide by inter-
264
i national football law. Busby assured Denis that if he kept his
nerve the Italians would accept the 115,000. For an anxious
month the situation remained deadlocked. Busby was not
publicly involved. In August 1962 Torino blinked and the deal
was closed. This was Busbys biggest ever bet.
The atmosphere of the dressing-room Denis Law arrived in
was tense with a clear undercurrent of spite and resentment.
Busby had originally put his tracksuit on to bridge the gulfs he
so despised as a player. His presence would shape the character
of his clubs dressing-room. This was the soul of a football club.
Now, in his absence from the United dressing-room, a situation
amounting to anarchy prevailed. The rooms beneath the stand
at Old Trafford were divided, unhappy places. There werent so
much gulfs as chasms between the various types sharing this
unhappy epicentre of the club. Busby wasnt often seen during
the week, and Jimmy Murphy devoted most of his energy to the
youngsters. Jimmys role had changed since Munich. He had
changed himself. Like Matt, he was more on the fringe of things.
Jimmy had been given the title Assistant-Manager in 1955, an
acknowledgement of the work hed done with the pre-Munich
youngsters. Nothing changed except the title. Things did change
after the crash. He didnt go to the Cliff on Tuesday and Thursday
nights, except the odd time. Afternoon coaching sessions ceased,
and with them the danger of Jimmy telling you to be back at two
oclock had passed. Now Wilf McGuinness and Johnny Aston did
most of the work Jimmy and Bert Whalley used to do. The reserve
team dressing-room was a more relaxed place on Saturday
afternoons. Jimmy still promoted the same principles but
although the message was the same the words lacked the fervour
of the past. The dynamic presence of the thirteen years between
_ 45 and58 no longer imposed on the young and gifted who arrived
at Old Trafford after Munich. Compared to others Jimmy
Murphy was still a passionate man, compared to the demon pre-
Munich he was aparagon of reason. He seemed kind, like a pastor
rather than an evangelist.
Evangelism was for younger men, and Jimmy, like Matt, had
aged. There was an air of melancholy about him as well. On
Youth Cup nights he came alive, you saw a flash of the old fire,
but nobody was ever reduced to tears as John Giles had been, or
265
shamed as Bobby once was for throwing the ball away on the 
halfway line. There was no more effing and blinding. He was
likable. He understood. |
The first team dressing-ro om was dominated by Cantwell, |
Setters, Gregg, Foulkes, Crerand and amused by Albert |
Quixall the court jester. Denis Law kept to himself. Bobby
Charlton said nothing. Nobby Stiles, Bobby and Shay Brennan
were close, sharing rooms, playing crib for pennies on the coach
and going for half-a-bitter or to the pictures on Friday nights
away from home. For Bobby the years between 1960 and 1964
were strange. Effective wingers were always fundamental to
Busbys team. Finding himself without an outside-left in 1960
Matt turned to Bobby whose range of gifts equipped him to play
virtually anywhere. Thus, this potentially great inside-forward
spent four seasons playing as a winger. Even though he won
international honours at outside-left Bobby hated it.
Reflecting reluctantly on United before and after Munich,
Bobby admits that the happiest time for me was up to it
happening. After that, well I wouldnt say it was a job, I still
enjoyed playing  but nothing would ever really be the same. I
hated playing on the wing, waiting, depending on other people.
I wanted to get into the game, to get something out of it. I
remember once at Notts Forest I didnt touch the ball for twenty
minutes. So I started going inside to look for it and Jimmy was
there saying stay wide. But I said, Jimmy Im not getting a
kick, and he said, You will.
I hated it but I never really questioned it. If that was what
The Boss wanted I did it.
The chasm which existed in Uniteds dressing-room divided
those who felt like Bobby, Tony Dunne, now an established
first team player, Nobby Stiles, still on the fringe of the side,
Shay Brennan, Bill Foulkes and John Giles, and a group led by
Noel Cantwell and Maurice Setters who were contemptuous of
Busby, his staff, the training and Uniteds way of playing the
game. Harry Gregg was an active campaigner for his own party
of one. Denis Law didnt get involved. Paddy Crerand whod
come from Celtic which hed thought of as a joke felt that the
situation at Old Trafford was little better. David Herd listened
and played. Quixall provided the banter.
266
For two months after Christmas 1963 Britain froze to a
standstill. United didnt play a League or FA Cup match
between Boxing Day and 23 February. This was a bad time fora
club in ferment. Nerves frayed, old grievances surfaced,
simmering resentment became open hostility. Angry voices
rang on the training ground, frustration, which might otherwise
have found an outlet in competitive football, now consumed the
various factions inside Old Trafford. Fist fights resulted when
five-a-sides got out of hand. Something had to be done. Harry
Gregg went to see The Boss. Everything had to come out in
the open Harry felt, but everything was not exactly what he
meant. Everything focused on Jack Crompton whom the
dissidents identified as the problem. Not daring to voice their
opinions about The Boss to his face, Jack presented the
perfect target. Jacks training was a joke. Jack wouldnt let
them have the ball. Jack didnt know the game. Jack would
have to be sorted out. Nobody was thinking about the game at
Old Trafford. That was Jacks fault. Harry felt The Boss
should know.
Busby knew more than Harry thought. He agreed to call a
meeting to clear the air. Everyone could have a say, out in the
open. The meeting was held in the first team dressing-room.
Busby presided, Jack stood in the dock and listened as his
regime was condemned. Cantwell and Setters had plenty to say.
Harry weighed in. Most mumbled unconvincingly about their
own pet theory: more ball work, more sprints, more weight-
training, less weight-training, stamina work, speed work. Some
declared themselves happy, others passed. Denis passed,
saying he hadnt been at the club long enough to express an
opinion. Bobby was quiet. Paddy was with Noel and Maurice.
John Giles thought the whole exercise was a waste of time, he
thought the players had too much to say. John understood the
real problem which was the absence of authority, leadership, on
a day-to-day basis, within the club. The hidden agenda was
Busby, Jack was merely a convenient fall guy. Giles understood
Busby, and respected him sufficiently to know that even though
he wasnt around during the week the training was his training,
Jack was simply doing a job. John knew that Manchester
Uniteds problems wouldnt be solved  or even addressed  by
267
ae

clear-the-air talks. Like Nobby he belonged still in the oot
team dressing-room, unconcerned with the politics of this
debate.
When all had had their say Jack was given his. He was a quiet,
unassertive man of the old school. If the new ideas about
training and coaching hadnt been imposed at Old Trafford it
was because The Boss didnt want it to happen. Busby had
exposed him to this ordeal, conveying the impression that he _
was neutral. Jack might have passed the buck to The Boss
when he began to defend himself. But Jack knew better.
Him Jack pointed dramatically at Cantwell, his most
articulate prosecutor, things havent been right at this club
since he walked in the door. Cantwell had spread discontent.
Hed undermined everything, he should get on with his own
business and leave the running of Manchester United to those
paid to do the job. Cromptons voice was calm. There was no
hint of diffidence. He was sure of his ground. The opinion he
expressed was Matt Busbys. The old fox now knew the score.
The meeting had not really been about clearing the air so much
as assessing the mood in the dressing-room.
Matt Busby knew all along about the dissidents views, what
he wanted to find out was how brazen they were prepared to be
in expressing them in front of him, and more critically, how
much support there was for the new thinking.
Wilf McGuinness was Matts eyes and ears in the dressing-
room, for, although on the coaching staff, he was still one of the
lads. On Sunday mornings Wilf would come into Old Trafford
to have a beer and a chat about the weeks work with The
Boss, Jimmy, Jack and Johnny Aston. Ted Dalton always
joined them in Matts office. Id leave the ground about half-
one, Wilf smiles, and get last orders at the Quadrant. The
Quad was still the favoured pub for United players. There on
Sundays the previous days game would be mulled over and
arguments about the rights and wrongs of new ideas and old
were conducted over pre-lunch pints of bitter. Busby was
frequently on the agenda. Cantwell held court. Setters was
pre-eminent. Gregg another insistent voice. Quickie told
jokes. Shay Brennan agreed with everyone. Shay was the most
popular lad at the club. Close to Bobby and Nobby, just as
268
comfortable playing crib with them as brag in the heavy
_ gambling school, Shay was United as it had been before the
crash, a typical Manchester rogue who loved the game 
whatever or wherever it was.
In the Quad circa 63/64 the new men had much to discuss.
Jack wasnt the only target. Bobby wasnt a player at all. Gilesy
was a coward. Quickie was a cheat and whenever Harry got
too heated he was told that he was fucking mad.
Knowing all this, Busby still hoped that things would knit
together. His growing conviction, as United fought their
relegation battle in the spring of 1963, was that hed have to sort
a few people people out. This was not a simple proposition. He
liked Noel Cantwell. The big Irishman believed in the new ideas
he was campaigning for. Matt knew exactly what the issues
were and had discussed them with Cantwell, Setters and Paddy
Crerand. He liked Paddy as well. Another aspect of Busbys
character was evident at this time: his taste for rogues who
- made him laugh. On Saturdays he and Jean sometimes dined at
the Cromford Club with the Cantwells, Setters and Crerands.
Bobby Charlton and Denis Law both resisted joining this set.
Bobby had too much respect for Busby: I would never have
dreamed of asking him out for a meal. Cantwell did. Busby
accepted. Bobby thought he was too much of a gentleman to
refuse. Denis Law was a private man, full of banter during
working hours, an occasional patron of the Quad, for four
halves of bitter, but he wasnt into socialising with The Boss 
It wasnt on  or the politics of the dressing-room.
Bobby was right about Matts inability to say no to his senior
players. Away from work he was a different man, and all that
was formal was shed leaving only the charm. He was easy to get
along with. After a few drinks and a steak he would have a
laugh, talk about the old days in football, though not the recent
past, and be a gregarious, unimposing presence in the
Cromford. He loved the company of football people. Players or
old pals like Joe Mercer, Bill Shankly or Jock Stein whom he
would later get to know very well. Big characters, like Cantwell
and Crerand also appealed to a side of him the public rarely
saw. CBE or not, Matt Busby would, given a choice, rather
spend an evening with a bookie or a streetwise Scot like Paddy
269
Crerand than a bank manager or a bishop. The golf course ona ~
Monday afternoon allowed him the same kind of relaxation. 
The races or the dog-track yet another escape from the burden
of being Matt Busby, Manager of Manchester United. His
friendship with Louis Edwards was now firm and lasting. The
chairmanship of United would be in Matts gift eventually and
Louis was his man  Louis Edwards, Chairman of Manchester
United. It sounded good to both of them, the seal would be set
on their friendship and Matt would finally control the football
club hed created. This happy prospect lent urgency to the task
of solving the problems bedeviling United on the field and in the
dressing-room.
Around this time there was considerable speculation within
the game about a ring of professional players who, it was
alleged, were conspiring to rig games and profit by betting on
the outcome. As bookmakers accepted bets on single games as
well as doubles and trebles it was theoretically possible for
a relatively small group of players to exploit the fixed-odds
system. Odds on an individual game were, however, short.
Real profit would depend on rigging more than one game. A
middle-man would also be required to place the bets and a
bookmaker would serve ideally for this purpose.
These rumours of match-rigging were confirmed in 1963
when a number of professional players were tried and convicted
in the courts. The football world was shocked by the extent of
the conspiracy and the eminence of some of the players
involved. Three Sheffield Wednesday players, Tony Kay,
Englands left-half, Peter Swan, another international, and
Bronco Lane were found guilty and sent to prison. They were
among a number of professionals suspended from the game for
life.
The match-rigging scandal touched Manchester United when
two Daily Mail journalists travelled to Blackpool, where the
team were staying at the Norbreck Hydro, to confront United
goalkeeper Harry Gregg and some of his colleagues with
allegations that they had been party to the conspiracy. Busby
was deeply shocked when confronted with the accusation that a
small group of United players had sold games. Unable to
confirm the story, Busby persuaded the Daily Mail not to
270
_ publish the allegations. He then convened a meeting of
_ Uniteds players at which he warned that anyone caught or even
suspected of match-rigging would be out the door. The matter
ended there. However, Harry Gregg claims that there was
substance to these allegations and that he was asked to
participate in throwing matches on a number of occasions
between 1960 and 1963. Despite his refusal to participate,
Gregg has told me that matches were thrown by some of his
United colleagues and has named several players. One of those
accused admitted that there was alot of discussion about fixing
games in the United dressing-room but says that the talk never
translated into action. Others, innocent of involvement, ack-
nowledge that on occasions there did appear to be something
odd about Uniteds performances.
It is impossible to be certain on the basis of hearsay evidence
which may to some extent to be contaminated by personal
grievance. However there is no doubt in my mind that
Manchester United players did conspire to fix the result of at
least three games during the 60/63 period. It is widely accepted
within the game that those who were convicted in the ensuing
scandal were not the only prominent players involved in the
match-rigging conspiracy.

Despite finishing nineteenth in the First Division, Matt Busby
had some reason for optimism in the summer of 63. The FA
Cup Final victory was encouraging. United had won in style.
The miseries of the winter months faded as he watched the team
demolish Leicester City, Crerand and Law playing with par-
ticular flair. Crerand had had a nightmarish start at Old
Trafford. A beautiful passer of the ball, Paddy was as slow as
Busby himself had been when he played, but sureness of
instinct, clarity of vision and the most delightful imagination
placed him in the classic mould of great Scottish wing-halves.
His courage, physical and moral, was not in doubt. On his day
Paddys long incisive passes were delivered to devastating
effect. Off form he looked cumbersome, trundling adrift of the
play like a carthorse in a paddock of thoroughbreds. The
spectacular passes looked bizarre when they failed to reach
their targets, and the crowd would gasp at his folly. His early
271
at
games for United had been undistinguishe d at best. Wembley
saw the real Crerand. Busby was immensely supportive through ~
the period Paddy struggled. I know what youre trying to do,
keep doing it, it will come right, Busby insisted. In difficult
times like this Busby had the purists vision and the guts of a
tiger. The problem, was his, not Paddys. He would take the
stick in public.
Wembley had brought out the best in Denis Law, Matts most
expensive signing. Denis had looked the part all season. Even
in a struggling side he scored twenty-three goals. Denis was
more than a goalscorer. He was an inspiration, capable of lifting
those around him, his cavalier thrusts at the opposition
impudent and taunting sowing doubt in defenders minds, a
source of encouragement to his colleagues. In the box he was
deadly, quick, brave, elusive, taking half-chances with the
daring and sureness of a matador. No game was quiet, no cause
lost, no crowd less than enthralled when Law was hungry for the
game. He was fearless, wild, impetuous, a unique force in the
English game. Law was the kind of player systems didnt
produce. He was the product of life, a harsh Aberdonian
childhood blighted further by squint-eyed deformity which
caused him torment in schoolyard and neighbourhood. The
magic of football was Deniss solace as it had been Matthas and
all the great players. The thing of slumbering dreams, the
glorious escape from the world, the triumph of a beautiful spirit
over ugly material reality.
The great showman Law was extrovert at work  sardonic,
amused, intelligent and alone once the job was done. In Law
Busby saw the defiant spirit of his great lost team, the bit of
devil, the grace, the brio which was to Matt professional 
footballs ultimate vindication; the merchants and politicians
- could have the world, he lived for this beautiful, unsullied
expression of life. He loved the game and, like all who do, knew
there was nothing more to be yearned for than the sight of it
played as it was in the imagination  and so often by his teams.
At Wembley Law and Crerand allowed Matt to hope again.
Problems remained. After the FA Cup win another row
broke out about money. Wage disputes were nowa perennial
cause of friction at Old Trafford. United were still the First
272
Divisions poorest payers. The success at Wembley embol-
dened the lads. This time they would stick together. Although
heartened by the Cup triumph, Busby knew he was short of two
or three players of championship standard. He was not without
hope of finding them at Old Trafford, but more money might
have to be spent on the transfer-market. All the usual noises
were made in the dressing-room. The result upstairs was the
usual rout of the big talkers.
For the opening game of the 1963/64 season, away to
Sheffield Wednesday, Busby shocked football by dropping
three of his Cup-winning side. David Herd, Albert Quixall and
John Giles were omitted in favour of three youngsters, Ian
Moir, Phil Chisnall and David Sadler. Quixall was due to go
anyway. Hed been bought to do a job he was ill-equipped to
tackle, and though he was popular he lacked the appetite for
conflict. Jimmy Murphy and Wilf McGuinness were particu-
larly venomous about the Golden Boy of 1958. Busby admired
his skill but accepted that his staff were right. David Herd,
scorer of two Cup-Final goals, and nineteen the previous
League season, had been particularly stubborn during the wage
round, and dropping him was Busbys way of teaching him a
lesson. Giles was the most interesting casualty. Subsequently to
become one of the great midfield players of his generation,
Giles had played his last game for United. Within a couple of
weeks he was transferred to Leeds United, a decision which
Busby later admitted was his greatest mistake.
John Giles was a model professional. Beautifully balanced, a
superb passer of the ball with both feet, he fulfilled all the
criteria Busby sought in his players, yet the chemistry between
them was never quite right. Giles, a piss-taker of renown in the
reserve team dressing-room, was serious and intelligent about
his football. He was, rather like Busby, careful about express-
ing opinions and tended to keep his own counsel. Above all
John was uncommonly self-possessed. When he went upstairs
football rather than money would be on the agenda. Busbys
charm was met with football logic. Giles saw himself as an
inside-forward, Busby wanted him on the wing. He doubted
Giless lust for battle  a judgement which time would render
laughable, but which then was shared by the Cantwell/Setters
273
=e f
Debating Society and, significantly, Jimmy Murphy. Giles had 1
had a run at inside-forward in 61/62 but a virus infection, 
undiagnosed, left him weak although he kept playing. This 
period culminated with a disappointing display against Spurs in 
that seasons FA Cup semi-final. I think he gave up on me
then, Giles confesses.
On reflection it is remarkable that for a couple of seasons
Busby fielded a team with Bobby Charlton and John Giles,
destined to develop as two of English footballs greatest inside-
forwards, as makeshift wingers. Charlton resented this, Giles
did so more obviously.
After Uniteds Cup semi-final win over Southampton in 1963
Busby, decided to leave Giles out of the side for a league game.
Busbys method of dropping players was well known at Old
Trafford and offers another fascinating insight into the non-
confrontational side of his character. Giles and his friend Nobby
Stiles were frequent victims. Hed call you into the Referees
room on Friday mornings, John recalls. This was a bad omen.
How do you think youre playing son? hed begin. Being young
lads wed be honest and say, Not bad, or Not so good.
* Thats right, hed agree, Im going to give you a rest. 
After the Cup semi-final Giles was prepared, and when
Busby collared him in the Refs room to ask how he thought
hed played, John replied, Well. And continued, How do you
think I played?
Reasonably well, Busby conceded.
Why are you leaving me out then? John responded. If I
played reasonably well and we won a Cup semi-final and Im
still being dropped Ive got no chance, have I? The logic was
unassailable.
Giles played at Wembley but the die was cast between Busby
and himself. They were in many respects alike, tough men who
guarded their emotions and were firm in their convictions about
how the game should be played. The anarchic atmosphere at
Old Trafford dismayed Giles who was, like others from pre-
Munich days, concerned to play football for Matt Busby rather
than seek undue influence through dressing-room politics or
socialising in the Quad or the Cromford Club. John was not
alone in feeling an outsider at this time. Bobby Charlton,
274
Nobby Stiles, Tony Dunne and Denis Law also felt Busby was a
prisoner of the self-appointed praetorian guard of senior
_ players whose opinions were sought and acted upon. Thats not
quite the way it was, but its how it seemed.
When Don Revie offered 34,000 for Giles, Busby accepted
and the player was happy to leave. Paddy Crerand was a
_ notable dissenter from the Debating Societys view that Giles
-had no bottle. Bobby Collins rang me from Leeds about
John, Crerand confides. I told him I thought John was a great
player and Leeds were getting a bargain. A day or two before
Giles left he met Wilf McGuinness in the car-park. Dont
worry, Wilf comforted John, The Boss might change his
mind. Giles laughed, He might, but I won't.
Busby lived to regret this departure from the club more than
any other in his career, but the fact that Leeds were struggling in
the Second Division made Busby feel more sanguine about
Giless deal than he might have done selling to First Division
rivals. The prudent Matt liked to bury the departed lest they
come back to haunt his team and raise doubts about his
judgement. The same consideration applied when Denis
Viollet left for lowly Stoke City. Alas, for Busby, football had
not heard the last of Leeds and Giles.
The 1963/64 season belonged to Denis Law. He scored thirty
League goals, and ten more, including two hat-tricks, in an FA
Cup run which West Ham ended in the semi-final. United
finished second in the Championship. They might have won the
title if Law had not run foul of referees and injury. English
football was becoming faster and meaner. Hard men like
Liverpools Tommy Smith, Chelseas Ron Harris and Spurs
Dave Mackay were among the most intimidating of a new breed
of defenders who, unlike their muscle-bound post-war counter-
parts, were as quick and, in Mackays case as skilful, as the
forwards they ruthlessly pursued. I think anybody doing their
job up front was very lucky to play a full season without
injuries, Law concludes, reflecting on the Sixties. Leeds
emerged in 1964 to add an even nastier dimension to the First
Division. In Bobby Collins and Norman Hunter Leeds
possessed two particularly wicked exponents of subtle yet
terminal destruction. While Harold Wilson led the Labour
275
Party into government, promising to create a new Britain
forged in the white-hot heat of technological revolution,
League football at all levels was becoming leaner, more
efficient, and gifted players who couldnt compete were a
luxury those seeking to win could no longer afford. As Law
points out; Every team has one or two hard men. Denis met
fire with fire. Nobody would bully him. Suspension, hefty fines
and controversy resulted. Busby was criticised for failing to
curb Laws retaliatory impulses but he knew that his mans
aggression was of the essence. Publicly Busby expressed his
disapproval, privately he allowed Laws nature to take its
course.
Manchester United began to be respected again, but behind
the scenes the gulfs remained. Many of the younger players had
been infected by the poison in the air around Old Trafford in
the five years after Munich. The clubs character had changed.
In the year after the FA Cup win things took a turn for the
better. They needed to. An outbreak of thieving spread
suspicion through the dressing-room. Heavy gambling in card
schools and at Manchesters three dog-tracks was a plague now
infecting the youngsters at the club. Contempt for Busby was
not erased by the Wembley win. That season I was selected as
twelfth man for the away game against Notts Forest. The
journey by coach allows a glimpse of the mood prevailing.
Busby sat in his usual front seat for the relatively short trip to
Nottingham. Across from him Champagne Louis, large cigar
in large hand; beside him, Martin Edwards his _public-
schoolboy son, a pleasant, well-mannered lad. Further back the
card schools; the serious brag for wads of folding money, and
the crib players jousting for fun and pennies. I was sitting
reading a newpaper somewhere between The Boss and the
lads at the back of the bus, feeling a little overawed at this first
taste of the big time, when a folded sheet of paper fell on my
lap, dropped from the seat in front. When I openened it I was
shocked to see a vicious caricature of Busby drawn with great
skill and care in ink. The image was a perfect likeness of him in
stern-faced repose. The nose was drawn as a penis, the cheeks
as two testicles. The caption read Bollock Chops. This cruel
depiction of The Boss did not amuse a nervous eighteen-
276
_ year-old. Terrified, I passed it back to the sender, a senior
player whose name I cant remember. For those of us outside
the cauldron of the first team dressing-room Busby was still an
awesome man. I was a bit of a lad myself but this I simply
couldnt comprehend. The caricature does, however, illustrate
the depths to which Busbys stock had sunk among a faction in
the club. Ironically, United won at the City Ground that
afternoon.
The thief was eventually trapped but not before substantial
sums were stolen over-a period of several unhappy weeks. The
culprit was caught when found in possession of marked money
used as bait. Busby had personally taken charge of this episode,
during which he made an uncharacteristically insensitive
remark seized upon by those who sought to ridicule him. A
meeting of staff was called to discuss the thieving. In passing
The Boss alluded to there being a nigger in the woodpile.
Denis Walker, one of the first black players to emerge in the
professional game sat unperturbed at the offence. The snigger-
ing at Busbys blunder lasted for a day or two, and the incident
strengthened the view that he had lost his touch.
First team results, however, indicated otherwise, and United
finished the season in style. Tony Dunne, replacing the injured
Noel Cantwell, had made the left-back position his own, and
was beginning to look like one of the best defensive full-backs in
the game. That promise was fulfilled. Nobby Stiles established
himself at left-half towards the end of the season. Maurice
Setters, on the other hand, was on his way out. Setters was not .
Busbys type. At West Ham the season before, Busby had lost
his temper after a defeat when he returned to the dressing-room
to find Setters shouting the odds. Busby pulled him into the
bathroom, out of sight but within earshot. Who the hell do you
think you are? Why is yours the voice I always hear when I walk
into the dressing-room? Busby shouted. Setters began to reply.
Busby told him to shut up and listen. The hard man shut up.
Busby knew almost every move his players made. Maurice
Setters belonged to the work-hard-play-hard tendency.
Important games the following day didnt always curb his taste
for late night adventures, and he wasnt the only pre-match
absconder from the Russell Hotel, Uniteds London head-
277
quarters: Shay Brennan and later George Best were others who
occasionally broke the eleven oclock curfew. Busby could be
forgiving of such behaviour  if you did your stuff the following
day. Alas, Setterss desire to embellish his rugged play with
skilful flourishes he rarely managed to achieve was less easily
forgiven. Loose talk in the Quad which parroted Noel
Cantwells intelligent analysis of the game, but lacked the
coherence of real conviction, did nothing to endear Setters to
The Boss.
Billy Behan, Uniteds Irish scout, believes that Busby had
already made up his mind about Setters when the club visited
Dublin to play an exhibition game against Shamrock Rovers in
the spring of 1964. Before this game at Dalymount Park Setters
was unnecessarily dismissive of a group of Dublin youngsters
seeking autographs. Behan, who witnessed this scene was
concerned about the effect on the clubs image. A decent,
mild-mannered man and a close friend of Busbys, Behan
surprised the United manager with the vehemence of his
complaint about Setterss abrupt refusal to sign the kids
autograph books. Dont worry, Matt assured him, hes on his
way.
George Best made his first team debut on 14 September 1963
against West Brom at Old Trafford. He played outside-right in
place of the injured Ian Moir, who had himself taken John
Giless red shirt a few weeks earlier. Albions left-back,
Graham Williams, was a tough, experienced Welsh inter-
national, but George gave him a chasing. George looked
younger than his seventeen years, he was a schoolboy among
men, and he played like a schoolboy as well. He was a
schoolboy in football terms, for nobody had told him how to
play since he arrived at Old Trafford. George Best wasnt a pro.
Six months earlier, when Britain began to function again
after the Great Freeze and football had resumed, George
played for our youth team in the FA Youth Cup tie at Sheffield
Wednesday. David Sadler also got into the side that night. We
had a good team, we fancied that this would be our year in the
Youth Cup. George had not been in the team. He played at
Sheffield only because our regular outside-left was injured. We
lost 1-0, with George contributing nothing. He fucked around
278
on the left-wing all night. We put the result down to him. He
played like a schoolboy. He didnt do the simple things . . . give
it toared shirt . . . play it simple . . . the balls made round to
go round. Jimmys gospel didnt apply to George. He hadnt got
the message. We thought he was just another of those brilliant
kids who could make the ball talk in the car-park but couldnt
do the business when it really mattered. Car-park virtuosos
were nothing new at Old Trafford, kids who could make the ball
talk yet couldnt apply their technique to the real game. Albert
Quixall could do anything with a football until you put
opposition on the field. Football wasnt about technique, rather
the application of ability to the business of winning. There was a
lad called Barry Grayson at Old Trafford around this time, a
Manchester and England Boy, whose skill was incredible. But
he couldnt play, despite making us feel inadequate on
Wednesday mornings. George was deemed to be in that
category by his young peers.
He was also frail. Size had always been his problem. His
father Dickie, an iron-turner in the Belfast shipyards, was a
useful left-back in local amateur soccer. My mother was more
sporty, George remembers, she played hockey for a local
team, I used to go and watch her. He thinks his gift came from
his mother.
Football is the first thing George remembers in his life: From
day one I was always kicking a ball around. I always carried one
with me. He played for the school and Craigie Boys Youth
Club. He thinks he might have played once for Northern
Ireland Boys, but his most powerful memory of schoolboy
football is of failure. Size was my main problem. I remember
getting into trials and the final sixteen who were picked for the
squad, but I never got a game. Once there were seventeen of us
left with a chance of making the final fourteen, and I was left
out. It was a right sickener. I was too small. It didnt bother me,
I was an inside-forward and I always scored goals. Bob Bishop,
Uniteds Belfast scout, who saw the gift but wondered about the
strength, has gone into folklore as the man who discovered the
genius. Thats not exactly what happened, George recalls. A
fella called Bud McFarland ran one of Belfasts most successful
schoolboy clubs. He mentioned me to Bob. They thought I was
279
}
too small, so they set up a match against a team of lads who were
a couple of years older than me, to see how I handled it. Our
side werent supposed to have a chance but we beat them and I
scored a couple. That was it.
He was offered a two-week trial at Old Trafford. I had just
passed my final exams to be a printer. The idea was Id come
back and go into printing if things didnt work out. George
travelled to Manchester with Eric McMordie, another fifteen-
year-old Belfast lad, whom hed never met before they arrived
to board the ship for Liverpool. We got a train to Manchester.
The first thing that struck me was that nobody met us at
Manchester, which I though they might have done as we were
two kids away from home for the first time. We got a taxi from
the station. When we got into the cab and asked for Old
Trafford the driver said, Which Old Trafford? We nearly
freaked out. We thought he was a nutter. Wed never heard of
the cricket ground.
They met Joe Armstrong at the ground. It was summer, boys
were arriving at Old Trafford every day, some to start work as
apprentice professionals, others, like George and Eric, for
trials. You were insignificant. The place was huge, you felt
small, embarrassed to be arriving with your secret dreams, your
little case full of shirts and underwear, with your best trousers,
carefully folded by your mum before you left home, neatly
stacked on top of all the wordly goods you possessed. Your
departure had been one of the most emotional days in your life
and your familys. Your arrival was a non-event. Especially if
you were on trial, hadnt cost a few grand or, in Georges case,
even a Miraculous Medal.
Joe Armstrong met us at the ground. He introduced us to the
Irish lads; there were quite a few of them at the time. So there
were: Harry Gregg, Jimmy Nicholson, Sammy McMillan, and
Willie Donaldson, all from Northern Ireland. All seeming
adult, self-assured, giants, composed and smartly dressed, fit,
lean, at ease, belonging to this new world, everything you
werent.
Joe took us to the digs, Mrs Fullaways in Chorlton. We
spent our first night there. We were both frightened to death.
We werent sure what was going on, it just felt strange. So we
280
uh
es

- hada chat and decided to see Joe Armstrong the next day to tell
him we were going home.
Eric was the most convinced that this was what they should
do. George feels that if they hadnt been together theyd have
stuck it out alone.
Georges mum was delighted when he arrived home. Matt
Busby got on the phone to find out what the problem was. Matt
knew the feeling of arriving in a strange city with a little case and
a frightened heart. He told Dickie Best that George was
welcome to give it another go if he changed his mind. Two
weeks later George came back, alone, to Mrs Fullaways.
Boys from Northern Ireland couldnt sign as apprentice pros
because of an agreement reached with the Irish FA designed to
| stop English clubs stealing the best young players from the
native game. This deal sought to make it difficult for English
clubs who were obliged to find proper work for the boy until he
was seventeen when he could turn full-time professional. Like
most football regulations this one made no sense and was
widely disregarded.
The Apprentice Professional Scheme was one of professional
footballs New Ideas. Like all the other New Ideas this one was
well intentioned. Instead of wasting two years on the brush,
sweeping terraces, cleaning boots and scrubbing the dressing-
room bath, or going off to work in a factory until they were
seventeen, youngsters would start learning the game at fifteen,
be imbued with the wisdom of coaches who would make players
of them. George Best was denied this privilege: like Duncan
Edwards, Bobby Charlton, John Giles and many other great
players, he had to go to work in the real world for a while, losing
out  or so it seemed  to the lucky fellows who spent their
formative years in the pro game listening to men with ideas.
I went to work for the Manchester Ship Canal Company as a
tea-boy, George explains. I hated it. I was just a messenger
running around the place for anyone who wanted anything. We
trained at the Cliff on Tuesday and Thursday nights with the
juniors and amateurs. I wasnt very pleased about it because I
hadnt come to Manchester to be a tea-boy. I stuck it out for a
year.
When he started training with the rest of us George made an
281
impression straight away. We had learneda trick or two, he still
played the game as you would on the street. He was impudent,
trying the kind of things youd get away with on your own street
against kids who couldnt really play. The dazzling little flicks,
the nutmegs  poking the ball through their legs and skipping
past their stupid, clumsy challenges  the mazy dribbles of your
imagination, now made real in street or playground against kids
who stumbled and fumbled desperately in your wake; past one,
then another one, cut towards the goal, sell another dummy,
shimmy past the last guy. . . then bang. . . into the back of the
net. Except it wasnt a net, it was the schoolyard wall or the
space between the lamp-post and the neighbours garden-wall.
The first thing you learned as an apprentice pro was to forget
that self-indulgent crap. This was the real world so you forget
your little tricks and learn how to be a player. Every coach had
his own idea of what being a player meant. They all agreed on
one: it had nothing to do with childhood fantasies. The trouble
with United in those days was  according to the sages in
Busbys dressing-room  that nobody was thinking about the
game, there was no coaching, it was a joke. The kids weren't
learning anything. George was cited as a classic example of this.
What a player he could be if someone got hold of him. But look
at him!
When you looked, what you saw was a skinny kid doing all
the things of street imagination. Nobody had told him that this
wasnt on. So he nutmegged and dribbled, beat one man after
another, then swerved the ball magically into the net, this net
being attached to little five-a-side goals. Now he wasnt waltzing
past clumsy kids on the street, but international footballers in a
crowded car-park. The price usually extracted for this kind of
thing was short, sharp and painful. You might be crushed
against the railway fence, propelled into the concrete grand-
stand wall or simply grounded on the cinder-strewn tarmac.
Your flesh grazed, a bloody fire on your shin or thigh, the pain
as intense as the embarrassment, you soon learned the lesson;
dont try it on kid, the dreaming days are over.
Strangely, George was never caught. His body was frail but
he possessed extraordinary flexibility of movement which
enabled him to snake his way through a scrum of powerful
282
bodies with the ball, impossibly, at his feet. His balance was
perfect. He rode the most determined tackles comfortably. He
was daring, an imp, certainly not a pro. Hed never get away
with it on Saturdays. Nobody ever had. This was not what the
game was about. There was a lot of talk about what the game
was about at Old Trafford those days. And everywhere else.
Organisation, efficiency, movement. Formations were coming
into vogue: Alf Ramseys 4-3-3, the Brazilians 4-2-4, the
Italians sweeper system. These were the things football was
about, they had to be learned, thought through, practised
during the week instead of playing five-a-sides.
John Giles recalls a conversation typical of United at the
time: We played Sheffield Wednesday in an FA Cup replay at
Hillsborough one night. Wed drawn at home, 62 I think, and
they were favourites to beat us. We won two-nil, Bobby and
myself scored the goals. Mine came after a good move; I played
a one-two with someone and got clear on goal. When we were
coming home in the coach all the talk was about one-twos.
Thats what the games about, they were saying . . . one-
twos, give itand go. . . it was rubbish. Id just played the ball I
saw, it was natural, you couldnt practise it or contrive
situations where you'd learn creativity. You either had it or you
didnt. If you had it nobody had to teach you how. You just did
it. If you didnt have the instincts nobody could give them to
you.
George was quiet off the field. He was not noticed amid the
banter of dressing-room life. He wasnt a lad. He wasnt
coarse the way young men tend to be where they are together.
George didnt swear. He was pleasant, laughed at jokes and
piss-takes along with everyone else . . . but they were never his
jokes and he was never the instigator of the piss-taking. We
stripped in the Away team dressing-room, wed graduated from
the Refs room. David Sadler, Jimmy Ryan, John Fitzpatrick
and Bobby Noble knocked around with George. They were a
mixed group. David and Jimmy were quieter types, the sensible
tendency, Fitzie and Bobby were lads.
George was always neat, trousers pressed, shoes polished,
shirts clean. Most of us in digs were less attentive to
appearance. We didnt have much money. Seven or eight
283
pounds a week, four of which went to the landlady. After wed 1
sent a pound or two home and had a good weekend wed be 
broke on Monday. Clothes were beyond our pocket. We made
do. A bit of good gear for town on Saturday night  and match
days  and anything you found near to hand most mornings. We
tended not to hang our trousers up the night before. Shirts
could last for three or four days. George took more care of
these things. Appearance meant a lot to him.
He introduced shampoo and talcum powder to the Away
team dressing-room. Wed wash our hair with the red carbolic
soap cut in rough lumps by Arthur Powell for after training use.
George would have Palmolive. And Silvikrin Shampoo. Also,
in his little bag of toiletries, Johnsons Baby Powder, which he
sprinkled lavishly over his skinny body with care while the rest
of us were horsing around happy that the days work was done.
We were rough and ready. He, a touch refined but generous
with money, good humoured, in no sense a goody-goody. Just
gentler than most young pros are.
He arrived at Old Trafford a year after I did. During that first
summer, 61, after he came back alone from Belfast, we took
him dancing one Saturday night to The Plaza. It was one of his
first nights out in town. The Plaza was still one of the places to
go; Jimmy Saville was the Manager/DJ although he was about
to open his own club, the Three Coins in Fountain Street. That
first Saturday on the town we were twisting the night away to
Chubby Checker. George never left his seat at the edge of the
ballroom floor. Having been in Manchester a year I knew the
scene, all the obliging girls. Manchester girls were very
obliging, particularly if you played for United. There was a girl
called Christine, a pretty little raver in our terminology. I
asked her to dance with George. Hes just come from Belfast, I
explained. She had a look. He was small, quiet, too small and
quiet for Chrissies taste. No way, she told me. I met her a
couple of years later when every woman in Britain wanted to
dance with George. She laughed ruefully and wondered if it was
too late. It was.
After his debut against West Brom, George was left out of
the first team for four months. Busby had given hima taste, but
as Wilf McGuinness explains, they were still worried about his
284
size and strength: We knew George could play, but he was
small and thin and we wanted to protect him. On Sunday
mornings when wed come in to have a chat about how things
were going, the Boss would always ask about George. We
decided to keep him out of the reserves, let him play in the A
and B teams and the FA Youth Cup side which we thought
was good that season. He was only seventeen and I think the
Boss thought he needed another year.
Back in the A team after his debut George was worried: I
found football easy in the A team but there were so many
good players at the club I wondered if Id even get in the
reserves. For a while I thought this is a waste of time, that really
every month I was at United was a bonus. I was playing inside-
forward for the youth team. John Aston was outside-left and
really I thought he was ahead of me. Bobby and Denis were in
the first team, there was another lad called Phil Chisnall in the '
side at inside-forward. I couldnt see much hope.
Despite the FA Cup victory and an encouraging start to the
season, Matt Busbys authority was still being questioned by
senior players. Setters, on the way, was not yet out. Noel
Cantwell was club captain. Giles was gone, Bobby Charlton
was still playing outside-left but not well enough to hold his
place in the side, according to the thinkers. Harry Gregg
conveys a sense of that period: There was alot of talk about
Bobby. Nobody disputed his talent but they said he was
brainless, didnt know how to get in the game. Yet he was in the
England side and the fans loved him.
The notion that Matt Busby shared his senior players
opinion about Bobby Charlton, but was afraid to offend
Uniteds supporters by dropping him may seem preposterous.
The fact that they believed this indicates his standing in their
eyes at the time. Another glimpse of the chaos behind the
scenes as United evolved through this period is provided by
Greggs memory of a pre-match break at the Norbreck Hydro
in Blackpool prior to the 1963 Cup Final: We were having a few
beers one night early in the week. Id been left out of the side
after the semi-final and there was a lot of piss-taking along the
line of: Dont worry, Harry, reserves are welcome to have a
drink with us. Shay Brennan and Gilesy were the two worst
285
a }

mickey-takers. But it was in good fun. A singsong started that
night. Matt and Jimmy were over in a quiet corner of the bar.
Paddy Crerand sang Kevin Barry (an Irish rebel song) and
young Sammy McMillan, who was in the squad and came from
Belfast, sang The Sash, a Protestant song about the Battle of
the Boyne. When Sammy finished, Paddy threw his glass of
beer in the kids face. The Sash was like a red rag to a bull for
Paddy with his Glasgow Catholic thing. But he was completely
out of order, wed only been having a laugh. The Boss saw the
whole thing but never said a word.
Later that night Harry kicked a hole in the door of the room
Brennan and Giles were sharing after theyd made one joke too
many about the big goalies reserve team status. This time
Busby did react strongly after a complaint by the Norbrecks
manager. Pre-Munich Busby would have acted after the first
incident involving Crerand and McMillan. Now he had mel-
lowed somewhat, on the surface at least. This was all the
denigrators saw. Mistaking patience for weakness. And, adding
his forbearance of misbehaviour to the Jaissez-faire nature of
footballing matters at Old Trafford, some influential dressing-
room figures came to the conclusion that he was gone.
15
Gone!
If I walked past him and he smiled I
felt I was in the presence of a
superhuman being, which he was,
still is to me.
George Best

News of Matt Busbys demise hadnt reached the new crop of
youngsters at Old Trafford. The Boss was as revered by us as
hed been by the Red Devils. Like Duncan Edwards, Bobby
Charlton and Nobby Stiles, George Best felt a buzz every time
Busby was around: If we were playing a Youth Cup match I
could feel his presence in the stand. I played for him, George
recalls. So did Nobby, still the fan for whom the red shirt meant
everything, and Tony Dunne whod seen the Munich team play
in Dublin against Shamrock Rovers and now thought he was
living. a dream with a Cup winners medal in his possession as
well as a regular place in the first team. Tony was now playing
left-back. Shay Brennan was at right-back, a good footballer, a
Busby-lover, who stayed his distance from club politics.
At Christmas 1963 things seemed bleak for George Best. He
hadnt played again in the first team since September. His
prospects seemed grim when youth team coach Wilf
McGuinness told George that he could go home to Ireland for
the festive season. It was bad news if you were allowed home for
the holidays. The message was that you werent even required
for the reserves. The first team were due to play Everton at
Goodison and Burnley home and away over Christmas.
United lost 4-0 at Everton. On Boxing Day Burnley
slaughtered them 6-1 at Turf Moor. Busby sent for Best. The
phone call to Belfast shocked George. He was on the next
plane. On 28 December he played outside-left in the return
287
fixture with Burnley. United won 51. George was sensational.
He scored a goal but it was the magical reproduction of his car-
park genius that signalled the arrival of a startling new talent in
the English game. Bobby Charlton moved inside to centre-
forward that day, the beginning of the end of his existence on
,
|

the margins of Matt Busbys teams. Bobby was one among
many convinced that Best was special after this performance:
John Angus was playing right-back for Burnley marking
George. John was a good pal of mine, we came from the same
part of the country. John was hard, and fast. Hed kick you, he
was like an oak tree and brave. George murdered him, stuck
the ball through his legs, turned him inside out. Wed heard
about this great young player in the youth team but I'd no idea
he was this good. There were so many youd hear about, who
were going to be this or that, but could never do it in the first
team. I dont think John Angus ever really recovered from that
match.
That was it. George stayed in the side, on the right or left
wing for the rest of the season. Hed leap-frogged the reserve
team. United went on to finish runners-up to Everton for the
title, and, for the first time since 1956/57, win the FA Youth
Cup. George played inside-left for the youth team who
attracted 27,000 to see them clinch the trophy against Swindon
at Old Trafford.
George Bests life was transformed during the hectic months
in the first half of 1964: I was stronger, especially my legs. I
found first team football easy. There were so many good
players: Denis, Paddy, Bobby, Nobby, Tony Dunne. I never
felt any pressure. The Boss would say, Keep it simple, go out
and enjoy it. I did. The stricture about keeping it simple was
not applied to George. But it was still the founding principle at
Old Trafford. In Georges case a more relevant virtue of
football as Matt Busby conceived it served: keep it natural.
We werent fancied to beat Manchester City in the FA
Youth Cup, George remembers. They had a good side. We
played them in the semi-final, home and away, we won both
legs. We drew at Swindon and beat them 4-1 at home. David
Sadler scored a hat-trick. Those few weeks were the turning
point for me. After the City game at Maine Road I was picked
288
e
AL }

Nie:
to play my first international for Ireland  against Uruguay in
i
Belfast. That whole period was like a dream.
The youth team went to Zurich for the annual international
tournament. George got drunk for the first time on this trip.
We headed into the city on the last night, we were going to hit
all the bars. There was David and myself, Fitzie, Bobby Noble,
Jimmy Ryan and two Manchester lads, Eddie Harrop and Dave
Farrer. Eddie and Dave were big lads, they could drink, pints of
lager. I had never drunk in my life, neither had John Fitz, we
both got pissed. Fitzie was worse than I. I had three pints of
beer, that was all it took. It was amazing, just pints of beer. I
couldnt drink a pint of beer today if you paid me. The main
problem we had was getting back into the hotel without the
Boss or Jimmy spotting us. They used to sit in this little bar
across the street from the hotel: the Boss, Jimmy, Jack
Crompton, Wilf, and I think Louis Edwards was with them.
I remember us being in a taxi and I was hanging my head out
the window. I was going to be sick. The taxi-driver said hed
double the fare if anyone threw up in the cab. We got him to
drop us off around the corner from the hotel. Eddie and Dave
got on each side of Fitzie and me trying to hold the two of us up.
We got in somehow without being seen. They dumped Fitzie in
the bath first  to sleep it off  then they got me into my room. It
was my first experience of a moving room. I thought I was going
to die. I didnt have another drink for about three years.
Manchester United had finished strongly in the League, and
reached the FA Cup semi-final and the quarter-final of the
European Cup Winners Cup within twelve months of staring
relegation in the face. The Wembley victory of 1963 had proved
a turning point. Humiliation by Sporting Lisbon in the second
leg of that quarter-final Cup Winners Cup tie was the low point
of an otherwise profoundly encouraging season. United won
the first leg comfortably 4-1 at Old Trafford. Lisbon was
regarded as a formality. Denis Law hit the post in the opening
minutes, after that it was backs to the wall all night. At the end |
' Sporting led 50. This tie was George Bests first experience of
European competition. Busby, rarely angry in the post-match
dressing-room, showed his emotions on this occasion. Two
players, Maurice Setters and Phil Chisnall, a clever skilful
289
i

inside-forward of whom Busby held a high opinion, were doomed 1
by this dismal performance. Setters played only eight more
League games for United before being sold to Stoke for 30,000.
His departure allowed Nobby Stiles to claim a regular first team
place at last. Chisnall played once more before being sold to Bill
Shankly at Liverpool for 25,000. In the close-season Busby
signed John Connelly, the English international winger from
Burnley, and Pat Dunne, a goalkeeper from Shamrock Rovers.
Connelly who cost 56,000 proved a superb buy.
Fast, strong, skilful and brave, Connelly played forty-two
League games the following season scoring fifteen goals.
Manchester United won the First Division Championship from
Leeds on goal difference. Season 1964/65 saw the birth of a
great side which will be remembered as long as soccer is played.
Over the next four seasons Manchester United staged a
glorious last stand for virtues to which Busbys whole football
life had been dedicated.
English football was poised on the brink of its Golden Age,
when, for a few years, men, great and close to greatness,
competed for the games most coveted prizes. England won the
World Cup in 1966, a victory for Englishness as personified by
Alf Ramsey, one of those whod come to management with new
ideas in the years when Busby was deemed to be gone.
Ramseys way was one of many, he only one of many influential
men during that period.
At Leeds Don Revie was creating another potent force which
was to evolve from nasty negativism to grandeur of a kind in the
years to come. Bill Shankly, Matts passionate pal, had
produced a great Liverpool side and at Maine Road Joe
Mercer, another close friend of Busbys, was about to join
forces with Malcolm Allison from the old West Ham Academy
to build a championship-winning team of style and vigour.
Before this decade was over Everton, with Kendall, Ball and
Harvey in midfield, would also emerge, Arsenal destined to win
the Double in 1971 were in embryo.
In the Golden Age between the mid-Sixties and mid-
Seventies one saw a fusion of great forces, a new breed of
capable, charismatic coaches and managers, the inheritors of
the power Busby had gained for those charged with the
290
responsibility of putting teams on the field. The pioneering
radical who had fought to define the role of the modern
manager was now challenged by men whose right to impose
themselves and their ideas, existed, primarily, because of the
respect Matt Busby had won for professionals. Thus, Ramsey,
Revie, Shankly, Mercer, Allison, Catterick, Nicholson,
Clough, Howe, and Bertie Mee, Ron Greenwood at West XN

Ham, Tommy Docherty at Chelsea, and in Scotland Jock Stein
at Celtic who in 1967 were to become the first British club to win
the European Cup. For the first time the power vested in the
football club manager was wielded not by one or two but by a
generation of extraordinarily capable men, their talents widely
dispersed across the map of the Football League. Their
philosophies varied, dynamic personalities and fertile minds
were the common denominators.
Without players of commensurate talent these men of
powerful conviction could not give expression to their conflict-
ing ideas. In the mid-Sixties a generation of great players
emerged to bring professional soccer to vibrant life in its
Golden Age: Law, Charlton, Best, Stiles and Tony Dunne at
Old Trafford. Giles, Billy Bremner, Norman Hunter, Bobby
Collins at Leeds, soon to be joined at Elland Road by Terry
Cooper, Peter Lorimer, Eddie Gray, Paul Madeley and Alan
Clark.
At Anfield Shanklys vision materialised through Ian St
John, Ian Callaghan, Roger Hunt, Tommy Smith and Ron
Yeates. Manchester City had Colin Bell, Frannie Lee, Mike
Summerbee. At West Ham Bobby Moore, Geoff Hurst and
Martin Peters, three of Englands World Cup winning side,
sought desperately to keep their club abreast of the First
Division challenges. They failed. In another age any of those
teams might have prevailed to dominate the English game.
The Chelsea of Osgood, Hudson, Peter Bonetti, David
Webb, McCredie and John Hollins was infinitely superior to the
Chelsea of 1954/55 which won the Championship with the
- lowest number of points in history. Yet Osgoods Chelsea never
came close to a championship, although they managed to win
the FA Cup in 1970.
The powerful leaders and wonderful players were the two
291
elements which compounded to give this era unique splendour. 
Footballers of talent were fitter than their counterparts before _
them had ever been and more technically accomplished
than the generation of players to follow. Thus, for a few years
conflict was rendered vigorous and beautiful by a historical
convergence of talent, contrasting philosophy and distinct
personalities.
What once sufficed to lay hands on the Championship and the 
FA Cup was no longer enough. English football required more
of its pretenders during these years than had ever been
demanded before. English football between 1965 and 1975 was
about many things. Every quality essential to sport at its most
enthralling found expression in that era: great talent; passion;
team play at its finest; the gifts of great individuals harnessed to
a single cause; athleticism, pace, power, aggression; the
absence of self-indulgence. Added to those positive elements
were the darker realities of professional soccer which are just as
real as its glorious potential: aggression rendered ugly, a means
of vicious intimidation; the wicked leg-breaking tackle; the
maliciously lingering boot, studs, a painful weapon, their use
perverted by swift assassins like Hunter, Giles and Collins of
Leeds, Arsenals Peter Storey, McCreadie and Harris at
Chelsea, Tommy Smith at Liverpool.
The removal of the maximum wage in 1961 also had a
profound effect. For the first time professional footballers felt
that their achievements would be reflected in their wage
packets.
Despite all that had passed before, it can, I believe, be argued
that the Manchester United team of 1964-8 came closest to
reflecting the people, places and experience which had formed
the man who sent it out to play. Football for Matt Busby, as for
Mattha, was about the spirit. At its most glorious, football
transcended the ordinary, the material. There was no formula,
just people, expressing themselves through this tantalisingly
simple medium. Footballs properties  imagination, courage,
grace and wit  were Gods gifts, belonging to the humblest
person, be he in Orbiston, Manchester, urban ghetto, mining
village, the slums of Naples or the barrios of South America.
Set against the influences that formed Matt Busby, the
292
- composition of his last great side offers a fascinating insight,
_ showing the degree to which in his most trying phase in
management he sought survival through the kind of people he
trusted and knew best. Of the -six bought players in the
Championship side of 64/65, four were Scots, one Irish and if
you stretch the point, John Connelly, the Englishman from
Burnley, was of Irish descent.
David Herd, son of Matts old golfing partner Alex, contribu-
ted twenty-three League and FA Cup goals. Denis Law, the
modern Hughie Gallacher, scored thirty-one goals in major
English competition. Paddy Crerand, Busby the player reincar-
nated, was the magnificent orchestrator of midfield, controlling
the rhythm and direction of Uniteds attacking play. Pat Dunne
in goal, bought for a modest 30,000, was in the bizarre
tradition of Busby goalkeepers, occasionally inspired, often
competent, never completely reassuring.
The rest of the squad was reared in the United family and of
its ethos: Nobby Stiles, Collyhurst Catholic, a fan who played
with the guts of Jimmy Murphy and the football wisdom of
Busby; Nobby, the quintessential Mancunian, earthy, pas-
sionate and privately warm and modest; Shay Brennan,
Manchester in another guise, the gambler, handsome, night-
town man, his Englishness doused with Irish charm; Bill
Foulkes, the miner whod never really left the pit, taciturn,
dependable, the block of granite in the bejewelled showcase, a
surviving Red Devil; Tony Dunne, Irish, clever, Dublin, one of
Billy Behans greatest discoveries, the best defensive left-back in a
generation of outstanding quality; then Bobby Charlton, the kid
from Mrs Watsons, another son of a mining village, a Red
Devil, a Busby loyalist who had sacrificed four seasons of his
footballing life without demur to serve Uniteds cause which was
life itself to him; on the fringe for the Championship season,
David Sadler, elegant, in bearing and manner, a cut of the young
Busby on the Merseyside tram before the war, the decent,
intelligent, well-behaved model professional of Busbys imagina-
tion; John Aston, son of Johnny, showed enough promise to
travel with the first team; John Fitzpatrick, a Scot, played a couple
of games; Noel Cantwell, on the margins, though still respected
by Busby, also played twice.
293
And then there was George Best, Irish, Protestant, the iron-
!
}

turners son from Belfast, who shared the values that had made
United great in the past. Busby was his inspiration. Lifes
simple pleasures, digs, bowling-alley, snooker hall, cinema, the
world of Chorlton. Manchesters innocent pleasures were for
George as for the Devils, a glimpse of paradise in these 
teenage years. Zurich was exotic, football at Old Trafford with
Busby looking on was heaven.
Footballers as people first, that was Busbys secret. Even the
oldest of these men were boys to him. His job was to facilitate
their development as human beings, their innate talent would
then blossom. That was his formula.
The. Championship was bitterly contested through the spring
of 1965. Leeds and United drew clear in the closing weeks. In
the FA Cup the two clubs were due to meet in the semi-final.
This was Uniteds fourth consecutive semi-final appearance.
The first game at Hillsborough degenerated into a brawl. Leeds
were ugly, spiteful, malicious, bent on intimidation. There was
some irony here. Revie had not been a tough player. He was
most remembered asthe deep-lying centre-forward in the mid-
Fifties Manchester City team which attempted to copy the
Hungarians. |
When he got the managers job at Elland Road, Revie made
a great public show of travelling to Old Trafford to seek Matt
Busbys advice. Busby stressed the importance of a family
atmosphere at a football club. This principle was acceptable to
Revie who repeated it ad nauseam for years, and Leeds did
become a caring club, caring, that is, about their own. Players in
trouble, Billy Bremner being the most notorious, but not the
only one, could always seek help and understanding from
Revie. Flowers were sent to pregnant wives, a Christmas party
was thrown for children of the Elland Road staff.
People were treated like human beings, but this value did not
extend to opponents on the field. Revie didnt initially have the
players to play the way Matt Busby believed you should, so
football as played by Leeds was a war of attrition. Thats how
they clawed their way out of Division Two and immediately
became a force in the First Division. Busby could pass on the
relatively simple virtue of family, but courage and wisdom, the
294
rare qualities that were fundamental to the creation of
_ Manchester United, were not transferable.
Don Revie was a new thinker. Taking charge of Leeds he
decided, as Alf Ramsey had at Ipswich, that with the players at
his disposal success would more likely be gained by stopping
others playing. When John Giles arrived at Elland Road in 1963
he was astonished and heartened by the difference between
Revies club and Busbys. The United he had left was at its
lowest ebb: It was a huge transformation for me, John recalls.
First of all the spirit of the club, between the players, was great.
Also the attention to detail. The first Friday morning I arrived
they were actually talking about the next days game. I liked it
straight away. The atmosphere was different, people were
consciously thinking about the game, small things like throw-
ins, free kicks and corner-kicks were discussed and planned.
People were intent on doing something. It wasnt all left to
chance. Id never known anything other than Old Trafford, but
this felt right to me. I thought this is what you should be doing.
The training was also different. Syd Owen and Les Cocker
assisted Revie. They were new thinkers from the Lillishall
Centre for Football Thought where a new breed of coach was
learning what the game was all about. Everything we did at
Leeds had a purpose, Giles explains. The training sessions
were much shorter and sharper. He agrees there was a lack of
respect verging on contempt for the game of the Forties and
Fifties. We talked about the sloppiness of defending, full-backs
allowing balls to be knocked inside them, letting wingers free,
not being on the cover. What we wanted at Leeds was
organisation. Properly organised, the good players would be
better, the poor players  which we had afew of at the beginning
 could at least be functional. Basically we would cut down the
goals against and win games scoring fewer.
Manchester United had great players, we didnt at that
stage. So we paid more attention to detail, concentrated better
for ninety minutes. Bobby Collins was, Giles admits, a huge
influence because of his attitude and competitiveness. Collins
was a wonderful footballer in the Scottish tradition with a streak
of malevolence in his soul. Standing five feet four inches,
Collins was the most feared midfield player in England.
295
Thus, the scene was set for the semi-final brawl of 1965. The }
result, 0-0, was secondary. Football was outraged by the
behaviour of both teams in what was judged the most ill-
tempered semi-final for years. Busby and Revie shared the
blame for allowing matters to get out of hand. Referee Dick
Windle booked only two players. Denis Law scuffled with Jack
Charlton. Laws shirt was almost torn off his back. Bobbys
brother, Jack, did not belong to  or agree with  Leedss
malignant tendency. Collins, Giles, Hunter and Bremner were
the warriors. Law, Crerand and Nobby Stiles didnt turn the
other cheek. George Best, injured, missed the Hillsborough
battle and the replay which Leeds won 1-0.
We were gutted, Nobby Stiles remembers. Out of the FA
Cup, United now focused on their Championship contest with
Revies team. There were seven League games to go, and Leeds
were favourites. The semi-final victory gave the new men a
critical psychological edge. We went to Blackburn three days
after the semi-final, Nobby recalls. I always wanted to play,
but I had no heart for it that day. Denis was the same, and
Paddy; George was injured. Blackburn were a good side,
Ronnie Clayton, Bryan Douglas. I remember walking on the
pitch before the match and thinking the whole season could be
over today. Bobby was the one. We had three world-class
players in that side, for me Bobby was the best. He covered
everything that day at Blackburn. He played them on his own,
his spirit lifted us. People talk about his ability, but this was
down to guts. We slaughtered them, 50. Bobby scored three.
A fortnight later we went to Elland Road and won 1-0.
United won six of those last seven games, losing only at Villa
Park on the last day of the season when the Championship was
already claimed.
I left Old Trafford that summer. This mattered little to
anyone but me. The manner of my departure illustrates Busbys
sensitivity to the smallest detail of Old Trafford life. He was
The Boss of old once more. I had been a promising youth team
player but was neither strong enough nor good enough to make
further progress in this born-again football club. I asked for a
transfer. The Boss saw me in the office. There was a saying that
nobody ever made it after leaving Old Trafford. This was an
296
_ article of United faith. Busby reminded me of this. Players are
desperate to come to Manchester United. They dont choose to
leave. Hed reminded John Giles of the same fact of football
life. As I was hardly going to make it in Manchester United
terms I wondered why he bothered in my case. But he did. He
wanted me to stay another year. I, concealing my awe,
remained firm. There was a good reason for dojng so. Noel
Cantwell had marked my card. Birmingham City, then a First
Division club, wanted to sign me, and Joe Mallett, Citys
Manager, was a pal of Noels. Hed offered 8,000 for me, all I
had to do was convince the Boss I wanted away. In the endI
managed, politely, to hold my ground. The following week
Matt sold me to York City, newly promoted to Division Three.
The fee was 4,000. At Birmingham I might just have
developed to disprove the adage that there was no football life
after United. That was a long shot. York was safer from the
clubs point of view. I wouldnt come back to haunt him as John
Giles had at Leeds. This was the kind of detail Matt Busby paid
attention to. He was a hard man all right.
The summer of 1965 was George Bests last taste of normal
life. He was famous in Manchester already, twelve months on
his name would be known around the world. Fame was on the
way. For now George lived contentedly with Dave Sadler in
Mrs Fullaways. Dave and Mrs Fullaways youngest son, Steve,
- were Georges mates. We just did normal things, George
somewhat wistfully recalls. We didnt really go anywhere
special, we couldnt afford to. Life was geared to football.
After Wednesday we didnt go out. We used to play cards for
pennies with Mrs Fullaway and Steve. I never dreamt of going
out. Maybe the odd time for a game of snooker on Thursday,
but not out as such.
Out as such meant the bowling alley, the Temperance
Snooker Hall in Chorlton or Steves working mans club for a
game of darts. John Spencer, later to become world snooker
champion, eked out a living hustling punters who fancied their
chances in the halls around Manchester. The Temperance Club
was one of Spencers haunts, and George was one of his
favourite mugs. George was a good snooker player, the best of
the footballers. Spencer always beat him on the black ball. First
297
giving George fifty up and just pipping him. Always just|
scraping home on the final colour. The starts increased, sixty 
.. seventy ... eighty. The result was always the same:
George parted with the money. A fair proportion of Uniteds
wages ended up in John Spencers wallet. This was Georges
vice.
David Sadler remembers those days with great fondness: We
were compatible. He was very bright, only interested in football
and I mean that. He was easy to talk to. We could be in the same
room for hours on end, playing cards, reading, not necessarily
even talking to each other. But we were comfortable together.
The club scene wasnt my thing, it wasnt Georges either. It was
bowling-alley, snooker or cards in the digs. That was it. He had
no appetite for drink or gambling. The Boss hated the serious
gambling so we just played crib or aces to kings for fun. On the
road George and Dave shared hotel rooms. All passion was
spent on the game.
The European Cup was Manchester Uniteds target in 1965/
66. They remained a force in the League, eventually finishing
fourth to Liverpool. Yet another FA Cup semi-final ended in
disappointment when United lost 1-0 to Everton. Subcon-
sciously everything focused on Europe. Munich was evoked in
newspapers, but never mentioned within Old Trafford.
United progressed comfortably through the opening two
rounds, then drew Benfica in the quarter-final. The Portuguese
champions had been in four of the previous five European Cup
Finals, winning twice. They were impressive though not
invincible as Real Madrid had been. Eusebio was Benficas
great player, wonderful everywhere, a deadly striker on goal, a
lover of the spectacular. He lacked the raw competitiveness,
the hardness, of the truly great, but Eusebio on song was
formidable. Coluna, Torres and Agusto were other fine Benfica
players. In the first leg at Old Trafford, United took a 3-1 lead.
Inspired by Eusebio, the Portuguese snatched a second and
almost a third. One goal was little to take to Lisbon where '
Sporting had inflicted a SO hiding a couple of seasons before.
Benfica were a different class.
On 9 March 1966 Manchester United destroyed Europes
best side 51 in Lisbons Stadium of Light, silencing the
298
_ 75,000 crowd who watched in disbelief as their team was taken
apart. Within minutes the tie was settled, George Best scoring
twice, his second goal the stuff of fantasy, defenders lying in his
wake, the keeper lured and passed, the ball guided insouciant-
ly to the net. Harry Gregg, who'd suffered a severe shoulder
injury that would finish his career soon after, played in goal that
night: I never knew the team come together the way we did
against Benfica. George was incredible but everyone played
great. It was the perfect display of football, he claims.
Manchester United were renowned again in Europe. The
next morning United made the front page of most British
newspapers. Their spectacular triumph had a resonance
beyond the world of sport, for the memory of the Munich Air
Crash eight years before lingered in the nations heart. The
image of the team that died was evoked, the club, so tragically
stricken on 6 February 1958, had emerged from its grief to
_ stride gloriously once more across Europe. The style, epito-
mised by George Best, was, as before, un-English: the new
Busby Babes, as United were misleadingly tagged, were
cavalier rather than stolidly British, vivacious, original and
brilliant where other English sporting heroes had been no more
than doggedly efficient. If the Red Devils, brashly confident,
had been the precursors of Britains cultural revolution of the
late Fifties, the liberation of the young and gifted from the
austerity of the post-war era and the conservative mores of
previous generations, George Best now became, overnight, a
symbol of the Swinging Sixties. Returning to Manchester the
day after Lisbon, George was photographed wearing a
sombrero as he descended the aircraft steps. The picture made
the front page. of Fridays Daily Mirror, the caption El Beatle
depicted him as no British sports hero had ever been before 
the professional footballer, not as modest hero, but as pop star,
the fifth Beatle, young, handsome, sexy and free. No slave had
ever been this way before. A new image of professional football
was cast at that moment. George became famous. Everywhere.
The Britain of staid tradition was no more. Carnaby Street,
the Beatles, the Rolling Stones, Mary Quant, David Bailey,
Terence Stamp, Twiggy, the icons of the new age were now
joined by George. He was a celebrity. George became Georgie,
299
no longer a back-page star, instead, a suitable subject for profile
;
on the womans page, in feature articles. Modelling the latest
line in Sixties gear the lithe, athletic, dark sensuous figure was
vital and authentic, striking, in a way that no male model could
dream of matching. The transformation was instant in the
manner of that age.
George was, perhaps, the most authentic hero of those years
and paradoxically the least equipped for the fame he now
experienced. A great athlete, he was, unlike many of his
celebrated Sixties contemporaries, substance rather than
shadow. Football was accessible to millions for whom Twiggy,
the Stones and Mary Quant were mere names, the source of
their celebrity vague and rather questionable. They were
merely famous, George was the scorer of goals, the conqueror
of muscular pursuers of malicious intent. Those dubious of
other decadent manifestations of this liberated age, the haters
of longhairs and mini-skirts, people who clung to the straight
and narrow, who despaired of sexual promiscuity, could adore
George Best. He was a footballer, the boy-next-door, a safe,
morally acceptable fantasy for women, the man other men had
dreamed of being, fellows who had never dreamed of being
Beatles or Stones. George was a man of action, his talent, like
his personality, easy to identify with.
The new superstar was nineteen, living in dies at Mrs
Fullaways in semi-detached Chorlton, getting high on penny
games of crib, snooker and darts. That night changed it all,
George confirms, life started to become crazy.
But first life became difficult. George tore his cartilage in a
League game. The injury not immediately diagnosed, he
played against Partizan Belgrade in the first leg of the European
Cup semi-final in the Yugoslav capital five weeks after the
humbling of Benfica. United lost 2-0. The Yugoslavs were
terrified of us, Harry Gregg claims, theyd read of the mighty
Manchester United back in all our glory. They were mes-
merised by the very name and thats how they played in the first
half. But we were terrible. George played with his leg strapped
up. He wasnt fit, yet he was still our best forward. Partizan
were a different team in the second half, they realised theyd
overestimated us and began to play.
300
The calculated risk of playing George failed. He finished the
game hobbling, a passenger on the left-wing. Gregg blames
Busby for this defeat: Our team talk was the usual, go out and
enjoy yourselves, play it as it comes. Thats what wed always
done. We made no adjustments, which you have to do in the
away leg of a European tie.
The Yugoslavs did not make that mistake in the return game
at Old Trafford: They were well drilled, physically and 
psychologically prepared to defend, Gregg explains, they
were able to adapt tactics to the needs of that particular
situation. Thirteen minutes from the end of a bruising, scrappy
encounter which Best, his cartilage problem now identified,
watched from a seat in the stand, United pulled a goal back
through Nobby Stiles. A frantic final drive ensued, but no more
goals. United were out of Europe. Busby was as usual
philosophical. He was sick, we all were cause we knew we
should have won on ability and chances, but he just shrugged
his shoulders and smiled that resigned smile of his. I felt sorry
for him, Gregg recalls.
Greggs criticism of Busbys approach to European competi-
tion is legitimate. A certain adjustment was required in the
away leg of these ties for, relying on talent and spontaneity,
United took no account of the fact that the opposition were
bound to be more aggressive and inspired before their own fans
and were bound to set out to kill the game away from home.
The point about adapting psychologically was particularly
relevant in the context of the humiliation inflicted by Sporting
Lisbon in 1964 and to a lesser degree to their defeat by an
ordinary Partizan side in Belgrade. Busby was culpable on both
occasions but time would show that he had learned his lesson.
Money, the perennial problem at Old Trafford, caused a
major dispute once more as England prepared to host the
World Cup in the summer of 66. On this occasion Denis Law
was the rebel. Remarkably, five years after the abolition of the
maximum wage, no Manchester player was close to earning the
magic 100 a week Tommy Trinder had awarded his beloved
Johnny Haynes. The going rate at Old Trafford was half that
amount, the clubs renewed pre-eminence notwithstanding.
Law had proved an outstanding acquisition, his brilliant goal
301
turning the 63 Cup Final and the twenty-eight goals he scored 
in the Championship year being equally decisive. Denis was 
|
known as the King by the Stretford End, a sobriquet deserved
not just for the goals but for his ability to lift the sides spirit with
electrifying interventions at critical moments in a game.
When his contract expired Denis decided to ask for a
substantial rise. The public showman was privately taciturn,
self-possessed, watchful, intolerant of fools. He rarely
socialised except on Saturday nights when he and Diane went
for a meal with Paddy Crerand and his wife. Denis was an
Aberdonian, canny, unlike Crerand the genial Glaswegian, or
Busby off-duty who enjoyed the gregarious company of the
Cromford Club on a Saturday night. This was not Denis Laws
scene. Nor did he care for publicity  journalists were always
kept at arms length. No colourful quotes fell from his lips.
There was a considerable gap between the extrovert at work
and the introverted private man. Even in the dressing-room he
left the talking to others. He was his own man, popular but a
member of no faction.
Denis conveyed his wage demand to hes in a letter: To be
honest, I didnt fancy facing him in his office, so I left the note
with Ken Ramsden in the secretarys office, Denis explains. He
then went to Scotland for his family holiday. Ramsden, Les
Olives assistant, passed the letter to Busby.
I was in Scotland when all hell broke loose, Denis ruefully
recalls. The press were on to tell me Id been put on the transfer
list. Next the Boss was on the phone telling me to get back to
Manchester straight away. Denis had imagined he was in a
strong bargaining position. Right was also on his side. United
were still the lowest payers in the First Division, with Shanklys
Liverpool, champions for the second time in three seasons,
similarly renowned for meanness.
Busby had phoned the Press Association on receipt of Laws
demand. No player is bigger than Manchester United and Law
will be on his way if he persists in his demands was the message
which made banner headlines in all newspapers.
Arriving at Old Trafford, Law was greeted stonily: He was
stern. Youve caused a lot of problems for this club, he told me,
a lot of heartache. Nobodys going to hold Manchester United
302
}

| to ransom. Then he reached into his drawer and pulled out a
typed apology which he told me Id have to read at a press-
conference hed called for later that morning. Wed always got
on well. But he was a hard man. . . and crafty. He said he was
protecting the wage structure at the club. But we did a deal
which nobody knew about. He told me that if I apologised in
public for the trouble Id caused hed give me half the rise Id
asked for. So I went out and ate humble pie.
Far from causing Busby heartache, Laws letter was a
godsend to the Boss. Rebellion about wages was perpetually
simmering in the Old Trafford dressing-room. The side was full
of international footballers well aware of the money players at
other clubs were earning. United were getting away with
murder. The force of Busbys personality was the weapon.
_ Laws challenge to the system did not provoke the anger
implicit in Busbys public response. On the contrary, Denis had
provided an opportunity, which Busby eagerly grasped, to relay
a message to other putative dressing-room rebels: dont even
dream of trying it on. If the King is dispensable anyone is.
Denis, for his part, kept quiet about his increased salary, and
began the following season the best paid player on Uniteds
books. Ruthless, clever and pragmatic, Busbys concern was for
Manchester United. Other clubs could afford to indulge their
one or two exceptional players; United, with a dressing-room
full of outstanding players, could not afford to satisfy them all.
Alf Ramsey had promised that England would win the World
Cup in 1966. He honoured that pledge. The nation celebrated.
Football became even more fashionable. The sense of a nation
revitalised was confirmed by its footballers defeat of West
Germany in a thrilling Wembley final. England was not any
more George. Mellys land of punitive conventions, austerity
[and] grey uniformity. The spiritual revival John Osborne had
angrily demanded seemed to have taken place. The English
were winners. Ramseys team had restored self-respect to the
national game. The best game in the world was no longer an
idle boast.
Ramsey did not, however, satisfy everyone. Although the
consensus within the game was that he had done a marvellous
job, dissenters were numerous and vocal. Many of us felt that
303
the price paid for victory was unacceptable. The charge a
at Ramsey was that he had sacrificed skill and imagination in
order to win. Assailed by virulent rhetoric, Ramsey  soon to
receive the first knighthood awarded to a Slave  affected
indifference. A warm, respected and knowledgeable football
man in the privacy of the dressing-room, Ramsey shared the
professionals contempt for the media. His public persona  the
stilted, monosyllabic language, the shadow of impatience on his
face as he listened to questions formulated on the basis of
received wisdom  compounded the impression of him and his
football values as narrow, conservative, a denial of what was
most inspiring in the game. His defence was that England had
won. But why not in style his critics persisted? The style of
Manchester United, Spurs or Liverpool.
The answer is obvious on reflection: England didnt have the
services of the great Celts, like Law, Best, Mackay, Bremner,
Giles, Blanchflower, and all the others of that ilk whose flair
fertilised the great English League clubs, creating an illusion as
to the true nature of English football. Ramsey had nothing
against brilliance of the kind his critics alluded to, he simply
didnt believe England possessed players capable of fulfilling
the glorious aspirations of those who damned him. Alf Ramsey
was an Englishman. His World Cup winning team. applied the
traditional English virtues of discipline, resilience and stomach -
for conflict, personified by Nobby Stiles, to the task in hand.
Winning.
Alf Ramsey was eventually vilified out of office. George Best
is one of those who identify the World Cup victory as the
beginning of English footballs Dark Age: After 1966 the game
stopped being a pleasure, the fun went out of it, he claims.
Denis Law disagrees: I was one of the people who mistakenly
blamed Ramsey. He wasnt the problem, it was the people who
copied him who are to blame.
Ramsey was a thinker with a first-class football mind. The
problem for the game was the second-raters for whom the
formula invented by Ramsey, to make the most of the talent at
his disposal in order to win the World Cup, became the means
to lesser ends.
Although ostensibly of little consequence to Manchester
304
United, Englands World Cup success did affect the lives of four
_ men at Old Trafford. Bobby Charlton returned to the club, his
place in football history ensured by his magnificent perfor-
mances embellished by unforgettable goals in Englands hour
of need against Uruguay and Portugal. He was a greater player,
more certain of his powers for the experience. Nobby Stiles was
similarly confirmed. His real stature had never been doubted by
Busby or his colleagues at Old Trafford. The public caricature
of Nobby the Destroyer was an outrageous underestimation of
his true talent. In fact he never kicked as such, never went over
the ball in the wicked manner of the games real destroyers. He
projected aggression and occasionally mistimed tackles to
spectacular effect. His true qualities were virtually impossible
to identify unless you were out there alongside him. Given a
man-marking job to do he was an unrelenting foe. The skills
required for this task were mental rather than physical, and
concentration was the key. Cover every move, wear your man
down psychologically. Break his spirit, not his leg. Thus
Ramsey had deployed Nobby to neutralise Eusebio in the
World Cup semi-final. Busby was persuaded to set that kind of
task for Nobby: Lets make it a ten-a-side today, was the order
if the circumstances required it. Nobby was a guaranteed
deliverer.
But that was only one of his gifts. He was a superb reader of
the game, assessing danger to make critical interventions which
looked easy from the stand. In a team which instinctively
reflected the Bosss taste for fantastic self-expression he was the
watchdog when United didnt have the ball. When the gifted
were self-indulgent Nobby remonstrated with them, using
invective to remind Law, Best and Charlton what this fucking
game was also about: marking at corner-kicks, picking-up at
throw-ins and battling for the cause to the bitter end. He was a
consumate professional with unfathomable depths of spirit,
real football intelligence and, behind the frantic gesturing, a
cool understanding of the ebb and flow of the game around him.
He could also playa bit.
Off the field Nobby was a quiet man, with a goonish sense of
humour and generous nature. His nickname Happy was an
affectionate allusion to Nobbys ability to project disgruntle-
305

oa
=
Tye
ment when the job demanded it. The snarling character of
international repute was a role he played, a necessary affecta- 
tion. Someone had to be the Baddie, the joke in the United
dressing-room concerned the gap between perception and
reality. Nobbys giggle was one of the most recognisable sounds
oncoach or train or minutes after the most intense encounter on
the field.
If not exactly an unsung hero, Nobby Stiles was a truly great
footballer as essential to the team as the men whose names 
Law, Charlton, Best  evoke the memory of Busbys last great
days. The World Cup completed Nobbys education, and he
returned to United with an honours degree in the art of
containing international forwards. This final move from distinc-
tion to greatness was not, however, reflected in Nobbys wage
packet. With the England team he discovered what others less
well-endowed were earning at clubs United always expected to
beat. He also knew that he was one of the lowest-paid players in
Manchester Uniteds first team. Mindful of the Law row,
Nobby decided against a similar confrontation. The Boss did
not offer a better deal.
Wilf McGuinness also benefited from that World Cup
summer. Wilfs success with Uniteds Youth Cup team had won
him the job of managing Englands youth side. A member of
Alf Ramseys staff, he helped behind the scenes as the England
senior team prepared for the World Cup. At twenty-eight he
was uniquely experienced for a professional of his years.
Busbys remained in most respects the seminal influence on
Wilfs thinking about the game, but Ramsey had also impressed
him. He returned to United believing that a balance could be
achieved between footballs two fundamentally conflicting
philosophies; self-expression and team organisation. He
thought, as many did, that what Matt Busby preached could be
reconciled with the new thinking Alf Ramsey had imposed on
the successful England team.
Although not directly involved, George Best was the player
most dramatically affected by Englands triumph. Englands
most famous footballer was a convenient medium through
which to explain and exploit the sport that had captured the
nations imagination as England won the cup. Millions of
306
people had been moved by the World Cup drama. They didnt
know much about football but they knew what they liked. The
academic arguments about Ramsey and 4-3-3 were meaning-
less to the nation at large. English success could not be
gainsaid. For most, George Best equalled soccer, and he was
deluged with offers of all kinds, commercial and personal. His
agent, Bagnal Harvey, handled the business. George took care
of the personal.
George had always liked girls. He didnt talk dirty about
women or come on like a stud, but he never passed an
opportunity by. His friendship with Jimmy Ryan, the closest pal
to him apart from Dave Sadler, had foundered when George
stole his pals beautiful girlfriend. One night at a party George
and the girl went missing. He was seventeen. Three years later
he and Jimmy still werent speaking and any dull morning at
Old Trafford could be enlivened by winding up one or other of
the two Romeos. Lisbon changed everything for George. Girls
were the most welcome thing in his life. After the World Cup a
better class of lady became available to him. Beauty Queens
and models were his speciality.
It was rather difficult to pursue this hobby living in digs.
Going to the bowling-alley, which he still loved to do, also
became complicated: Wherever I went people recognised me,
which was fine. Then I started getting hassled, serious stuff,
guys wanting to fight, in pubs, even restaurants. I was in an
incredible situation. I was getting ten thousand letters a week so
Ihad to employ three girls just to answer the mail. I was driving
a Rolls Royce, going out with Miss England and living in digs.
Mike Summerbee and George became good pals. Summerbee
had recently joined Manchester City. Mike and I decided to get
a secret flat. I ended up leading a double life, half the time at
Mrs Fullaways and the rest of the time in the flat. United didnt
allow single players to live alone. Digs were the order of the
day. The Beatles would never have stood for it, and George
resorted to subterfuge. But never after Wednesday.
One thing never changed. George Best remained in awe of
Matt Busby: I never bothered about money, I was earning
enough outside the game anyway. When my contract was up I
just signed a new one for whatever he offered. Playing was still
307
the greatest thing in my life. I never worried about a match. |
was strong then, particularly my legs. There were a lot of !
kickers in the First Division: Chopper Harris, Hunter and guys
like that, but they didnt bother me. I remember one game
against Chelsea. Id gone past Harris in the box and he took a
whack at me. It was a definite penalty and although I was
knocked off balance and nearly fell, I can remember thinking in
that split second; dont fall, if you stay on your feet you'll score.
Which I did. I suppose it was pride, I didnt want to give him the
satisfaction of stopping me. The best way to sicken him was to
keep going and score.
Dave Sadler testifies to Georges extraordinary courage:
Well at that time he was a complete man. He was so brave, so
strong in comparison to his size and build. If he got injured hed
still play. In my opinion he was without doubt the greatest
player I ever saw or played against.
George still played for Matt Busby: If he wasnt at a game for
some reason, if he was ill or away watching a player Id be
disappointed. He never said much after a game, Well done
son would make me feel great. In fact the best compliment he
ever paid me was to say I was the best tackler in the club. 
Sometimes Im frightened for you, he said.
By Christmas over one million people had watched Man-
chester United play. Englands World Cup victory had drawn a
vast new audience to League football. Best, Law, Charlton and
United were the star attractions. By April a million people had
passed through the turnstiles at Old Trafford alone, and
Uniteds average home attendance was a post-war club record
of 53,800. The huge crowds were not disappointed.
The 1966/67 season began unspectacularly. Alex Stepney,
bought from Millwall for 52,000, was the new goalkeeper.
United lost three of their opening seven games, and Busby
began to experiment. John Connelly was sold to Blackburn.
George Best moved to outside-right, John Aston replacing him
on the left wing. Dave Sadler took David Herds place at
centre-forward. Shay Brennan was dropped; Tony Dunne took
the number two shirt and Bobby Noble, a member of the 64
Youth Cup winning team, won a regular place at left-back. The
inclusion of Noble at Brennans expense was significant. Shay
308
was a footballing full-back in traditional Busby style. Bobby
Noble was more the defender: tough tackling, quick, with fire in
his belly.
This small compromise was Busbys only material concession
to the orthodoxy of those times, the view that destroyers were
essential if you were serious about winning. But Busbys mood
had changed. He accepted that United had been asoft touch,
too easy to play against when they didnt have the ball. The
notion of keeping clean sheets and getting a point away from
home, the tenets of the new rational age were foreign to him.
However, the change from Brennan to Noble reflected a shift of
emphasis which was psychologically more profound than the
new name on the team-sheet allowed. As a result United were a
sterner proposition away from home.
The Manchester United team of that season will be remem-
bered as long as football is played. Those who saw them rejoice
in the memory of spectacular goals, defences torn apart by the
glorious virtuosity of Denis Law, George Best and Bobby
Charlton. The defences humbled by Uniteds attacking play
bore no resemblance to their counterparts of previous genera-
tions. The most revolutionary development in the post-war
game was in the art of defending. Teams defended in numbers.
Defenders were athletes, terriers where once theyd been
collies. The area defenders set out to protect remained the same
size; they were more numerous and infinitely more formidable
than their predecessors who had faced the Red Devils a
decade before. The balance of football power had shifted in
favour of the negative. History proves that this change was
fundamental and irrevocable.
Set in this context, Manchester Uniteds Championship
victory in 1966/67 ranks as one of the greatest achievements in
the history of the game. In a new world they won in the old
style. They lost 2-1 away to Sheffield United on Boxing Day,
but after that they remained unbeaten in the League for the rest
of the season, conceding only twelve goals in twenty matches.
The decisive Championship game was played against West
Ham at Upton Park where United won 6-1 against a team that
contained three World Cup players, Moore, Hurst and Peters,
had won the European Cup Winners Cup in 1965 and reached
309
the final of the same competition in 66. After this performance |
Busby paid tribute to his team: This was my greatest hour. 
United had taken a 3-0 lead after ten minutes. The title was
theirs. What followed was described by the critics the following
morning as the finest display of football seen in England since
the war. Of the team which produced this perfect celebration of
all the disciplines in the game only three cost real money. Alex
Stepney, Paddy Crerand and Denis Law were the exceptions.
The others  Best, Sadler, Dunne, Stiles, Foulkes, Brennan,
Aston and Bobby Charlton  had graduated from Busbys
School of Excellence, the car-park at Old Trafford. Bobby
Noble, another from the academy, missed the last three games
of the Championship season. A car crash, two hundred yards
from His Stockport home, had brought his career to a tragic end.
He survived, alas disabled for life. Bobby was a lovely, typically
earthy Manchester lad, whose fate cast a shadow over Uniteds
season.
A fortnight after Uniteds Championship victory, Glasgow
Celtic beat Inter Milan to become the first British club to win
the European Cup. Celtics manager, Jock Stein, had much in
common with Matt Busby. He had worked down the mines
until his mid-twenties and shared Busbys romantic vision of
football as played by James and Gallacher and their Wee
Wembley Wizards. Jock loved the horses too. He gambled less
. furtively but with no more success than Matt. Their shared
success in the summer of 1967 seemed a good omen for the kind
of football Busby and Stein adored with equal passion.
For Manchester United the final emotive challenge awaited:
Europe. Winning the European Cup was not, as many claimed,
an obsession for Matt Busby. He didnt like the inevitable
references to the past whenever United were engaged in
Europe, and Munich was never mentioned in the Busby
household. According to Sandy Busby he got annoyed when
people mentioned the crash. Not even Jean could raise the
spectre of that dreadful day. He never talked about Munich or
the lads who were killed, Sandy confirms. We never knew if he
blamed himself.
Europe was not a crusade for Matt. United initially accepted
the challenge of the Champions Cup for pragmatic reasons.
310
nee
a
sah First he wanted experience for his young team. He believed in
playing matches, practice matches, five-a-sides, friendly
matches, all were better than training. There was no substitute for
games. Thats where you learned your craft. The better the
opposition, the more you were tested, the more you learned. For
that reason more than any other Matt defied the Football League
in 1956. There were other reasons. He had a large squad with
more quality players than he generally needed. European Cup
football allowed him to blood young players in real competition,
the better to prepare them for the First Division. Money was
another incentive. The great European club sides packed Maine
Road and Old Trafford. Seventy-five thousand people watched
United play Borussia Dortmund at Maine Road on 17 October
1956. The Red Devils had drawn 20,000 fewer people to their
League game at the same venue the previous Saturday.
Those were the football reasons for Europe. There was,
however, something else: Matts own love of style, the kind of
grandeur offered by the floodlit setting of a European night, the
pomp and circumstance, the graciousness, the mutual respect,
the contrast between all of this and the drab unction of an
English Saturday afternoon. To this ritual Matt was attracted,
the ceremony attending his beloved football.
The reasons for going to Europe were many, Matts taste for
adventure not the least significant of them. If he felt guilty
about the crash, this was why. In his character there were
conflicting spirits, always. One was responsible, modest,
conforming to the everyday necessities of ordinary life. This
fellow lived in Kings Road, Chorlton, in semi-detached com-
fort, an extraordinary place for a man of his spiritual dimension
to be confined. This modest Matt continued to live in Kings
Road when most of the journeymen professionals who drifted
through Old Trafford in years, shortly to come, inhabited small
mansions in fashionable Cheshire. The other Matt, more
circumspect, but no less real, was a snappy dresser, a gambler,
fascinated by the larger stage, the glamour of Hollywood, at
ease in the luxury of a great ocean ship or a grand hotel,
attracted to the exotic in that peculiar Scottish way. Those
closest to him respected him as he really was. They never
imagined he was simple.
311
United conceded just one gual on the way to the semi-final of
the European Cup in 1968. They played it tight away from
home against Hibernians of Malta  a 0-0 draw being enough
after a 40 victory at Old Trafford  and the same scoreline was
sufficient in Sarajevo to ensure progress if they beat the
Yugoslav champions at home. Goals from George Best and
John Aston saw them through to the quarter-final against
Gornik Zabrze of Poland. Brian Kidd, an eighteen-year-old
Collyhurst lad, scored for United in the home game, the Polish
defender Florenski knocking another past his own keeper to
give them a two-goal cushion for the second leg. Kidd, from St
Pats, the same school as Nobby Stiles, Wilf McGuinness and
Paddy McGrath, was in the side for Denis Law who had been
suspended for six weeks in October 1967, his third lengthy
suspension since returning from Italy. Denis had been sent off
along with Ian Ure for fighting in a League game against
Arsenal at Old Trafford. He and Best were particular targets
for the assassins without whom no First Division team felt
properly equipped to counter the great attacking players of that
age. Ure, in fairness, was no kicker. But Denis had a tendency
to strike back at the enemy and ask questions afterwards.
United had a poor disciplinary record, the most common of
their crimes being retaliation. Busby was criticised for not
dealing with this problem, criticism that was generally accom-
panied by a claim that in Nobby Stiles United possessed their
own hit-man. The reality as viewed from Busbys office was that
Nobbys aggressive posturing could not be compared to the
clinical wickedness of men like Peter Storey of Arsenal, Hunter
of Leeds and their less renowned counterparts in the First
Division, Duncan Forbes of Norwich being one such dangerous
character whose crimes escaped back-page opprobrium. As for
Law, Busby didnt approve but there was no way he was going
to inhibit a player whose combative spirit was the essence of his
game.
Law had another more pressing problem. Although it was not
yet apparent, Denis was to miss most of Uniteds critical games
that season with knee trouble that was defying diagnosis. He
would contribute only seven League goals as United attempted
the historic Double of Championship and European Cup.
312
Gornik managed only one goal on an icy surface in the return
- leg of the quarter-final, and United progressed to meet Real
Madrid in the semi-final. The League Championship had, by
the New Year, developed into a four-club contest. In early
January, United led Liverpool by three points at the top, with
Leeds and Manchester City also in contention. That lead
stretched to five points before injuries to Bill Foulkes and
Nobby Stiles allowed the chasing pack to close on United. The
most remarkable aspect of Uniteds season was the confirma-
tion of George Best as perhaps the greatest player the post-war
era had produced. He was more tightly marked than ever. The
euphoria of his early seasons had dissolved. This left Bests pure
genius. In Laws absence he grew to occupy the large void the
Scot no longer filled with his inspiring presence. Taking the
number 10 shirt for much of the season, George scored twenty-
eight League goals and made as many. He was now dating Miss
United Kingdom and the hassle was increasing by the week.
But his football was unaffected. When people question
Georges place in the history of the game, a video of the football
he played in season 67/68 will show all that is best in soccer
brought to spectacular realisation, grace and athletic purpose
forming an exquisite blend.
United beat Real 1-0 at Old Trafford. Denis Law played;
Best scored the goal. Francis Burns, another Scot from the car-
park who had established himself at left-back, played in this
game but was dropped in favour of Shay Brennan for the return
leg in Madrid. Denis Law was not fit to travel. A one-goal lead
seemed insufficient.
The team United fielded in the Barnabeu Stadium contained
only two bought players, Alex Stepney and Paddy Crerand, if
you discount Tony Dunne who was a boy reserve when first
acquired from Shelbourne for 6,000. In an attempt to protect
the one-goal lead Busby played David Sadler as an extra
defender in midfield. Brian Kidd and George Best played alone
up front. Overwhelmed bya brilliant Real performance,
United were 20 down, defending desperately when Zoco put
through his own goal to give them heart. The relief was
temporary. Amancio, Reals brilliant international forward,
313
responded to the unique rhythmical fervour of the Madrid
audience by teasing Uniteds defence, a dying, desperately
flailing bull to his matador, to score contemptuously. Real left
the field, regally, at half-time, 31 ahead and sure of their place
in the final.
Uniteds dressing-room was like a morgue. It was the old
story, Lisbon and Belgrade, a different script, the same
denouement. Busby said little. He was sick. Having seen
Benfica beat Juventus 20 he believed that this semi-final tie
against Real would decide the destiny of the Champions Cup.
The final against Benfica at Wembley would surely not be lost.
Bobby Charlton recalls those moments: They had won the
game. , Ill always remember going in at half-time and the old
man was speechless. Id never known him speechless before,
even Jimmy said nothing. We were gutted. Hardly anybody
said anything, I remember thinking there must be something,
someone must talk but nobody did. We were waiting for the
Boss or Jimmy but they were down. I was trying to convince
myself that it wasnt the end of the world, all the things you try
to dredge up to console yourself when you know youve gone.
Then someone said, We only need one goal to get a replay in
Lisbon. Someone else said, Lets have a go. That was all.
Busby told David Sadler to get forward whenever he could.
George Best was having a hard night: The guy marking me,
Sanchis, was a great defender. I could beat him but he always
got back goalside. I was having a stinker really. Sanchis was
only a kid but he was one of the best defenders Ive ever played
against.
United got back to level terms in the tie when David Sadler
made it 32 on the night. Charlton explains: Dave half headed
it, the ball clipped his heel and crept over the line. But really the
second half was down to them. I think Real thought teams dont
come back from 3-1 in Madrid. After Dave scored they started
to panic. This gave us heart. They started moaning at the ref,
appealing for everything. They were gone, different players
from the first half. I remember thinking of a few of them, You
wouldnt get in our side, not for attitude. 
Morale decided this game. United simply wanted it more.
There was no inspiring half-time oration from Busby or Jimmy
314
Murphy, no telling words of wisdom. They were gone in the
vernacular of the game. But they had done their work over the
previous twenty-three years. The esprit de corps of the car-
park, the deep unarticulated sense of values and experience
shared, bonds first formed in the A and B teams, the FA
Youth Cup and similarly daunting moments in Zurich where
the bottle factor often saw them through against European
opponents who wilted at a certain temperature, these were
the resources which in the end proved decisive on this historic
night. The commodity now brought into play could not be
bought.
With less than fifteen minutes to go George Best received a
throw-in from Paddy Crerand. United had their replay, in
Lisbon, but it was no longer enough. Real, a different breed,
had packed it in. Best ran at Sanchis and Zoco. George was
back in the car-park. So was Bill Foulkes who loved to get
among the goals in five-a-sides. Bill strode into Reals penalty
area. Bobby remembers wondering what the hell Foulkesy was
doing running past him: I couldnt believe it. Bill had never
gone into the other teams box except for dead-balls.
George was past Sanchis, past Zoco. Now from the goal-line,
he laid the ball in the path of a red shirt: I just remember seeing
a red shirt, George recalls, I pulled the ball back, looked up
and saw big Foulkesy  of all players  and he hit it in the top
corner. Nobby Stiles organised the resistance in the final
twelve minutes.
Busby cried in the dressing-room afterwards. His players had
honoured him. For many lesser men than Matt football was
only a game. For him it was his life. Football had rescued him
from grief in childhood, from the filth of the coalface in
adolescence. Football had not been, for Matt, about winning or
getting rich. The game was a glorious escape from loneliness
and squalor. Football was his faith. Defending his divine
conviction Matt Busby was hard, ruthless and, when necessary,
cunning. He was no intellectual, rather a man of instinct. He
was a loner, always had been, behind the various facades . . .
genial . . . team player. . . club man. . . pal. He never used
the word friend. There was a difference between a pal and a
friend. Harold Riley, the most perceptive of Matts pals 
315
remarks: Pal is a word he used very often . . . and in the most |
affectionate way. Pal is a loners word. Nobody, except Jean,
Sheena and Sandy, was closer than a pal. Jean was his friend.
The rejected child, the most poignant of lifes outsiders. Matt
had understood her in Bellshill when they met as kids, because
the death of his father had left him outside too.
Matt understood one communion  only one  which reached
the core of mens spirits bringing them together for a while:
football. For all the talk of camaraderie among miners the
General Strike of 1926 had brutally unveiled a shocking truth
about the brotherhood of friendship. His trust in football never
wavered. The ruthless enforcement of the Manchester United
ethos was necessary because he knew how ephemeral the
bondihg process was.
And he knew that all the great players were that because
football meant as much to them as to him: everything. The task
~ of managing such men had consumed him. His was an outsiders
club. The individual mattered, could find sanctuary in his club.
Most of Uniteds great players had been loners . . . Edwards,
Carey, Rowley, Whelan, Viollet, Charlton, Law and George
Best. He was what they had in common, he and United.
Football.
The goal created from the disparate gifts, and spirits, of
George Best and Bill Foulkes in the Barnabeu Stadium can be
regarded as good fortune or a mystical fusion of all the instincts
and experiences of Matt Busbys life. For a few extraordinary
seconds when he was gone, Best, the genius imp, and Foulkes,
the dour coalminer Busby had plucked from the pits of St
Helens, came together to rescue United. Popular Bill, the
quintessential loner didnt have a pal, much lessafriend, at Old
Trafford. Bill was not one of the lads, too dour, too bluntly
honest, no glib sense of humour. Hed seen too much of the
coalface to laugh easily.
George was less obviously but more profoundly alone. His
was the magic of Busbys childhood dreams. Two outsiders,
beauty and filth, George and Bill: Busbys life in microcosm. It
was a strange glorious night.
Denis Law was forced to miss the European Cup Final. His
knee problem had been diagnosed at last, revealing that he had
316
"a piece of cartilage in there, the residue of an operation hed
undergone at Huddersfield ten years earlier. He watched the
Wembley game from his hospital bed. United fielded the same
side as in Madrid against Benfica:

Stepney
Brennan Foulkes Stiles Dunne
Crerand Charlton Sadler
Best Kidd Aston

George Best remembers little of the game, except the feeling of
disappointment: I was looking forward to the match. Id
imagined ninety minutes of pure magic, I thought we would
hammer them. But I only played in snatches. Bobby scored a
header to give us the lead but we still werent playing well. I
dont know if it was the tension.
Neither team played well. Charltons glancing header was
beautifully judged, though he could never remember scoring
with his head before. It was weird. The night was weird. John
Aston was the outstanding player on the pitch, producing a
memorable performance he would never again match. Ten
minutes from time Benfica equalised. The goal was curiously
predictable. Torres, the giant Portuguese centre-forward
climbed above Uniteds defence to glance the ball to Graca who
levelled the scores.
Lying on the pitch waiting for extra-time, Nobby Stiles
remembers Busby: He said exactly the same as Alf in 66, If
you pass the ball to each other you'll beat them. It was
desperately humid. The other thing that lifted us was the sight
of them. They were like the Germans, knackered. Nobby had
known the worst moment of his football life in the closing
minutes of normal time: Id been man-marking Eusebio but I
got drawn towards a loose ball which was poked past me leaving
Eusebio clear on Alex. He went for the glory, tried to break the
net. Had he remained composed, Eusebio would have finished
United. Alex Stepney held Eusebios powerful blast.
George won the European Cup for Manchester United witha
classic street-ga: ne goal. Fastening with razor reflexes onto a
317
loose ball twenty-five yards from goal, he beat one man, then ~
another, then rounded the desperate keeper before gliding the
ball deftly across the turf into the empty net: It was like
something from Roy of the Rovers, he recalls, a smile of
wonder lighting his face. Brian Kidd and Bobby Charlton
scored two more goals to finish the Portuguese. Charltons goal,
a delicate touch, the ball spun on a teasing curve, beyond the
*keepers pawing reach, was, like the story it brought to a
climax, incredible.
No coherent memory of that night exists. George cant
remember where he went or what he did in the hours after the
game. Bobby Charlton had fainted after the semi-final in
Madrid. Now he collapsed again in his hotel bedroom: It was
worse this time than in Madrid. When we got back to the
Russell Hotel, Johnny Berry and Kenny Morgans were there,
and the families of the Munich lads, and I thought, great, this is
going to be brilliant. I went upstairs with Norma to get ready. I
was sitting on the bed waiting for her and she said, Right, lets
go down. When I stood up the blood seemed to drain out of
me. I tried five times but I couldnt get up. I lay on top of the bed
in my clothes and felt fine, but every time I reached the door I
was gone again.
Downstairs, Joe Loss and his Orchestra ssn for the guests
at the banquet. Nellie Busby and Jimmy and Agnes Matthie
were there from Old Orbiston. Matts sisters, Delia, Kathy and
Margaret as well. So were Duncan Edwardss parents. Duncan,
someone said, would have been thirty-one on this night. Matt
Busby sang What a Wonderful World.
David Sadlers memory is the clearest: I remember back at
the Russell looking at Bobby and the Boss, they both looked
drained. The Boss looked very old, which he had never seemed.
There was a sense that this was the end of something momen-
tous, there really was a sense of that and it was almost
immediate, not something that came days or weeks later.
Another thought struck Sadler, a notably cool and observant
man: I wondered if there was anywhere to go from here, even
in defending the cup. . . I dont know. . . his voice, for once
uncertain, trails off. John Aston thought it was a strange night.
Glorious, but strange.
318
16
Wonderful World
Matt had a phobia about the family.
He was too loyal to old employees. I
think that was his weakness.
Billy Behan

Matt Busby was knighted by the Queen in the summer of 1968.
The previous autumn hed become a Freeman of Manchester.
In February 1969 a Gallup poll identified Sir Matt as the seventh
most admired man in Britain, though the people who voted in
the poll didnt know very much about him. He had never been
on a chat show, books and profiles of him offered no clues to his
real character because he simply told the same few ancedotes to
everyone who came looking for his story. When pressed he
would refer to Manchester United and the achievements of his
teams: that, he would say, was the only memorial he wanted.
So it was for a notion of Sir Matt Busby that Gallups
interviewees voted. There was a montage of images, the story
of his club by which he was known: Munich, Bobby Charlton,
George Best, the gracious, genial image of Sir Matt himself and
the grand style of his teams. Courage, tragedy, style, achieve-
ment, an admirable decency of behaviour - that was what
people voted for. Reality was unusually faithful to the image.
But not by any means the whole story.
By February 1969 Britains second football knight (Sir Alf
Ramsey had been honoured in 1966) Manchesters first sporting
Freeman and Britains seventh most admired man was in a trap.
Professional soccer had produced many outstanding men, but
Sir Matt Busby was the only great man, in the fullest sense of
that description, ever to emerge from a sport that had changed
little since Billy Merediths time.
The circumstances Busby now found himself in illustrate
319

4
professional soccers endemic sickness. He had announced his 
retirement from team management in January eight months
after Wembley. Speculation raged as to who would succeed
him. He had decided that question but not yet announced the
name. The most immediate dilemma was what to do with
himself.
Sir Matt was touching sixty. Although he looked old the night
United won the European Cup he possessed a strong constitu-
tion. He felt vigorous by any standards, remarkably so for a
man of his years who had been through so much. Alas, for all
hed achieved he owned nothing except his semi on Kings
Road, Chorlton. Busby had, always earned good money. Since
1967 hed been on 10,000 a year with a ten-year contract. But
he was generous to his family, his mother in Scotland, his son
Sandy whom hed helped set up in a bookmaking business, and
daughter Sheena whose husband, Don Gibson, had just
eighty-eight League games in six seasons after leaving Old
Trafford. Matt had also gambled quite heavily.
 Onretirement to the position of General Manager of United,
Sir Matt was assured of a salary for the foreseeable future. He
would be treated like any other employee, better perhaps, but
still an employee. He couldn't become adirector of the club he
had built as Football League rules decreed that directors
couldnt be paid and shareholders were restricted to a dividend
of five per cent which yielded a mere 100 a year to Louis
Edwards, by now in effect Uniteds majority shareholder. So,
you could wield power in football or earn money. This was
professional football. Power could only be vested in the games
ruling class, the small-time merchants who liked the reflected
glory and petty boardroom politics which enlivened the other-
wise dull existence of a breed of very dull men. This was 1969,
yet professional football had stood still since the Edwardian
era, as deformed in the new Britain as in the old.
Sir Matt Busby was a professional. If he wanted to wield power
in the institution he had created he would have to live without
income. If he wanted material reward, Football League rules
determined that some kind of sinecure be devised for Sir Matt
Busby, Freeman of the City, Britains seventh most admired man.
Power was what interested Sir Matt. A clever man, he had
320
ye
Ae

devised his own means of keeping control of Manchester
United. He had his director, Louis Edwards. Champagne
Louis was Matts surrogate, groomed from the time theyd first
met backstage at the Opera House. Louis was, Matt thought,
perfect for the role. The butcher wasnt as close to Matt as
Paddy McGrath, Johnny Foy or Willie Satinoff, but his closest
pals were unsuitable for one reason or another. Paddy the
nightclub owner was wrong for the same reason as Johnny the
bookie. The images, nightlife and gambling, were wrong for
Manchester United. Willie Satinoff was clever and popular, but
he was his own man and Matt wanted someone who would
belong to him. Louis was perfect. Amiable, willing to listen,
anxious to serve the man he so admired.
In the Manchester United saga Louis Edwards has tradition-
ally been depicted as the villain, but Louis was no villain. He
was a nice man, aclassic Billy in the argot of the dressing-
room. Billy Bunters, Punters, there were good ones and pains
in the arse. Louis was OK. He was a bit gauche and physically
clumsy, but Louis was generous, bought the lads a drink, and he
wasnt a snob. Depending on who you talk to, Matts director
was a big soft lump, the Bosss lap-dog who hung on
Matts every word.
Most importantly, Louis was not Harold Hardman. Hard-
man, Busbys chairman, was of the Gibsonion school of
directors. Straight as a die, bright as a button, tough as they
make them. Hardman never succumbed to Matts charm. He
respected his manager, but expected respect in return.
Hardman always unsettled Busby. Basically the chairman
questioned things in a rigorous manner. For Matt, a creature of
impulse and instinct when it came to football matters, the
boardroom as debating chamber was a nuisance. The Tommy
Taylor transfer illustrates the point. Taylor had played only
forty-four League games when Busby decided to break
Uniteds transfer record to buy him for 29,999. Hardman was
uneasy about the gamble. He demurred again when Albert
-Quixall arrived for 45,000, another record-breaking purchase.
Harold Hardman had been a player, and that was the
problem in Busbys view. He had an opinion. The worst kind of
director was the man who thought he knew.
321
Louis Edwards came along at the right time. In the Fifties |
when Matt and he became acquainted, Hardman was proposing ~
to bring a new director on the board, claiming that United
needed fresh blood at boardroom level. Gordon Gibson was
the name Matt heard. He knew Gordon Gibson, and he was
horrified. Gibson was a former referee, a sometime visitor to
Old Trafford to train with the players on a Sunday morning. He
had opinions about the game. Harold Hardman multiplied by
two. No thanks. Enter Louis Edwards.
Louis did as he was told. The expensive players bought after
Munich: Quixall, Cantwell, Setters, Law, Crerand, Herd, were
all gambles. This was not the Gibson/Hardman way. Louis
tipped the boardroom balance in Matts favour.
They did a deal. Their pact was made in the early Sixties, the
Bollock Chops era when Busby was at his lowest ebb. At
Busbys bidding Louis set out to gain a majority shareholding in
Manchester United. This was a tricky business, time-
consuming, a touch delicate, but by no means impossible if
tackled the right way. There were just over 4,000 shares of
which Harold Hardman owned twelve, the Gibson family
1,762, the rest scattered around Manchester in small batches 
sometimes a single share  belonging to people whose forebears
had contributed in Uniteds hours of need in past decades.
In 1962 Louis began his task by getting a copy of Uniteds
share register. Then he employed a rather dubious local
Conservative councillor, Frank Farrington, to knock on doors,
many of them, buying up the shares. Alderman Farrington had
form. Louis knew him through dealing with the Council to
supply meat to schools and other municipal institutions. In
respect of this the Edwards meat empire was, like all other
municipal suppliers, dependent on the good will of fellows such
as Alderman Farrington. Good will came at a price. Louis was a
nice merchant. But he was a merchant.
Within eighteen months hed bought enough shares  forty-
four per cent  to give him effective control of United.
Hardman made a half-hearted attempt to resist. But the
straight-as-a-die solicitor knew he was beaten. Through his
brother Douglas, and brother-in-law Danzil Haroun, Louis
322
stitched up the business the year United won the FA Cup at
Wembley.
In the year of 1963 owning Manchester United was about
power not money. It was, indeed, a costly indulgence. Louis
Edwards spent 41,000 in the service of his old pal Matt. Louis
Edwards was a most unusual Billy. Lap-dogs dont come more
obliging. Matt was in the driving seat. Other professionals, his
pals, Bill Shankly and Joe Mercer, marvelled at his shrewdness.
The old fox had beaten the system.
When Harold Hardman died in 1965, Louis Edwards became
chairman. He had no power or influence, but he was chairman
of Manchester United. As part of their deal Louis and Matt
agreed that their sons, Martin Edwards and Sandy Busby,
would in time become directors of the club.
This was how things stood when Sir Matt Busby decided to
retire in January 1969. Louis suggested Sir Matt take a
testimonial game. Busby thought not. No professional manager
had ever had a testimonial. Players on the odd occasion availed
themselves of this windfall. But Busbys natural modesty set
him instinctively against the unprecedented celebration which a
testimonial match would inevitably entail. Besides it mightrain __
on the night. Power mattered far more than money.
The solution to the money problem was agreed; Sir Matt was
given a twenty-one-year-lease on the small souvenir shop
United had opened in 1967. He paid 2,000 for the Red Devils
shop with a nominal rent of 5 a week to keep things right. The
deal was to be kept quiet.
When Sir Matt Busby announced his retirement in January
1969 the football world buzzed with speculation about his
successor. Don Revie, Jock Stein, Jimmy Adamson, Dave
Sexton, these were among the more credible names mentioned.
Revie had no chance. The Leeds managers much advertised
visit to Busby when he first got the job at Elland Road was a
source of deep embarrassment to Matt. Leeds were the
antithesis of everything Busby believed in.
He was interested in Sexton who'd taken over from Tommy
Docherty at Chelsea two years before. Sexton was decent,
modest, intelligent and dignified, but tentative inquiries
323
revealed that he wasnt interested. His kids were at school. He
was a family-first man.
Guided by instinct, Busby had always favoured one of his
own kind. Years before hed thought about this moment, thus,
Johnny Carey and Noel Cantwell were offered coaching jobs at
Old Trafford. Both Irishmen chose managerial power else-
where. Busby briefly considered Paddy Crerand, his own type
in almost every respect, a Scot, a Catholic, a family man and a
lover of good football, but Crerand was still playing and had no
experience.
That left Wilf  a Collyhurst lad with coaching experience
who loved the club and understood its values. Wilf
McGuinnesss record as Uniteds youth team coach was excel-
lent. True, hed won only one FA Youth Cup, but the players
kept coming through: Best, Sadler, Noble, Burns, Kidd,
Aston, all had been nurtured by Wilf. But there were two
reservations about Wilf: his lack of experience and his tempera-
ment. On the first count Busby was reassured by the fact that he
would be around to cope in areas Wilf knew nothing about:
players contracts, transfer market dealing and meetings of the
Board. The question of Wilfs temperament was less easily
resolved. McGuinness was a very passionate man. He was not
cunning. On the contrary he was an open book. Well, almost
open. For nearly ten years Wilf had run with the hare and
hunted with the hounds. Always one of the lads at heart, he had
tried to reconcile his ladmanship with his coaching job. He
played in five-a-sides, drank in the Quad, played cards on the
coach and involved himself in the banter and pranks of
dressing-room life.
This was a balancing act of considerable proportions, and
sometimes Wilf fell off the highwire. There was the occasional
incident in the car-park five-a-side when Wilf got stuck in. He
wanted to win. Hed been a digger as a player. He was still a
digger on the car-park. Sometimes people dug back, fists were
raised. The conduct was unbecoming of a coach. However,
within the family this was a minor matter. Wilf was a good lad 
unquestionably in the young players minds, less certainly to
certain influential older players.
First team players in the Quad were wary of Wilf. Some
324
thought he was a sneak. He wasnt, but thats what they
believed. Busby knew this. He knew everything.
Wilf lacked the gravitas of a Carey or Cantwell, but he didnt -
lack courage. Hed tried to make a comeback in Uniteds
Championship season 66/67: I was training with the Laws,
Charltons and Bests, I got involved in the five-a-sides, that was
my outlet. I still had the dream. I thought I could play again.
After the World Cup I went to the Boss and asked him if I could
have a go. Busby consented.
We worked the insurance thing out, Wilf explains, If I got
in the first team they would pay the money back. His first
reserve team game was at Maine Road. United won 4-1. He
played thirty games in the reserves that season, and was
selected as twelfth man for the first team at Leicester: None of
the buggers would get injured. I put the Championship down to
me, he jokes. I was pushing them from behind.
One day Matt called him into the office. He was keeping a
good young player, John Fitzpatrick, out of the reserves. It was
make-his-mind-up time: keep playing but quit your coaching
job, or give up and stay on staff. There was no way I was going
to risk leaving Old Trafford, so I quit.
McGuinness had been courageous to the point of foolhardi-
ness, His leg had never been right  you could see the tortured
gait when he ran  the comeback was fuelled by astonishing
courage and will power.
The bookies opened a book on Busbys successor. Revie was
favourite, Wilf 6/1 fourth choice. The appointment was not
made efficiently. When Busby announced his retirement in
January, United were sixth from bottom of the First Division.
No successor was appointed at that time. Busby allowed two
months to pass. He wanted to be sure United avoided a
relegation struggle. Once survival was assured, McGuinness
would get the job. He said nothing to Wilf.
Billy Behan knew six months before that Wilf was the man.
Behan was one of Matts closest confidants. Ireland, a special
"place, was where he felt most at home. Matt had a phobia
about outsiders, Behan confirms. He didnt trust anyone
outside Old Trafford. It really was a family to him. The period
during the early to mid-Sixties, when he all but lost control of
325
United, reinforced a deeper mistrust of outsiders in the family. 1
Harry Matthie had come as just such an outsider into young
Matthas cottage half a century before. Power vested in Mattha,
shared with his first pal, old Jimmy Greer, had, thus, been lost.
His fascination with power was almost as old as he was.
Wilfs first clue about the job came in the form of a pointed
remark made by Billy Behan. The next inkling came on 8 April
1969 when Les Olive joked that he should wear a tie the
following morning. Sir Matt Busby had called a press
conference to announce the identity of Manchester Uniteds
new manager.
Wilf told a few of his mates to take the 6/1. He thought he was
in with a shout. Just a shout. Two hours before the press-
conference Sir Matt sent for him: He didnt ask me whether I
wanted it, he just said Youre the one. He even made it sound
as though hed picked me.
We will call you Chief Coach for a start, Sir Matt informed
McGuinness. Busby would be General Manager. Wilfs salary
would be 80 a week from 36 a week as youth team coach. The
title Chief Coach would protect him from the media, but all
team business would be in his control. His contract would be for
three years. Wilf was in a daze, but the words three years were
the most important Sir Matt uttered. Three years was enough
time to do the job. A couple of hours later the eyes of the
football world focused on him. Wilf McGuinness was the new
Boss of the most storied football club in Europe, in the world.
The torch had been passed on. Wilf grasped the lighted end.
He was completely unprepared. He wasnt sure of anything 
except the three years.. Who would discuss contracts with
players? Who would buy and sell? He understood hed pick the
team and run the day-to-day playing business, but the rest was
fog. At thirty-one he had his hearts desire, the details could be
sorted out later.
Busby, then plain Matt, had defined the modern managers
role. Now he redefined it to create in the club hed made great
the kind of circumstances for his successor which he would
never have tolerated. Nobody understood better than Sir Matt
Busby the ultimate truth of football management: everything in
a football club reflects on the field of play. If the manager
326
a

doesnt control everything the job cant be done. That was why
Oe,

he confronted James Gibson and Harold Hardman early on in
_ his time as manager. You pay me to manage, you must
therefore allow me the power to do so. No interference was the
founding principle of his successful career at United.
The new Chief Coach soon discovered the limits of his
powers. He could select the team and organise training.
Everything else was grey, negotiable. Sir Matt could attend
board meetings, no need to trouble Wilf with that. Players
contracts they could do together. When Wilf sat down with Sir
Matt at the end of the season to look at contracts he learned that
several first team players were earning more that he was. Nine
years after the removal of the maximum wage, Law, Charlton
and Best were just over the 100-a-week margin. There were
some anomalies on the salary sheet. Denis was the top earner.
Bobby didnt know or really care, except for the deal hed done
with Busby after Laws row in 66. I told himId play for United
for nothing, Bobby recalls. All I asked was that nobody should
get more than me. I didnt want more than anybody else. . . but
with all the rumours flying around about this figure and that, I
wanted to get the top wage whatever it was. Busby assured him
that no one would get more. Bobby never doubted The Boss.
All kinds of things which had been unimportant when Wilf
was one of the lads now began to assume significance. Minor
matters, doubts about the Sneak, old sparring matches, the
vulgar pranks, such things were now reassessed. The new Boss
was a distinctly human man. He had no mystique, one of many
rare qualities Matt Busby had brought to the job of manage-
ment.
Wilf made his own calculations. He had never lacked
confidence, even as a kid hed been cocky. Hed even con-
fronted Roger Byrne, insisting on equal rights with the club
captain as a teenage tyro. He was a Collyhurst lad, brave,
streetwise, unafraid. Dont be afraid was Wilfs first vow to
himself. His second concerned old friendships. That was a
nettle he was anxious to grasp. Too anxious.
Shay Brennan, Bobby and Jimmy Murphy were Wilfs closest
friends at Old Trafford. Jimmy was the most difficult to know
how to deal with now. Despite his brash persona, Wilf was a
327
sensitive lad. He was emotional, could be hurt and was |
conscious of people at a human level. Thrust suddenly into the 
biggest job in football, now determining the fate of great
footballers whom hed known intimately all his working life, the
problems seemed to overwhelm him. Every decision he made
was big, every nuance of his behaviour assessed to see what it
really meant. Given his free-spirited ways . . . the barbed joke
thrown away without any vicious intent . . . the vulgar Did you
give her one last night type of banter favoured in most male
bastions ... these staples of dressing-room life had new
resonance. What did he mean? . . . He shouldnt be talking like
that. Wilf was determined not to change, become a manager in
this respect. He was going to be himself; continue to play cards
on the: coach, for example.
But as far as Jimmy, Shay and Bobby were concerned he took
a different line: he would be tough, overcompensating for any
undue warmth he felt for old friends. Everyone would be
treated the same. Especially old pals.
Wilf had always been Jimmys protege. He was Jimmys type
of player, all heart and guts, desire. Now Wilf blanked his
mentor. Jimmy was hurt. Badly. The last thing Jimmy Murphy
needed at this time was blanking.
He had mellowed through the Sixties. Of all those left after
Munich Jimmy had suffered most. The pain he experienced was
different to Matts, more personal, more everyday. For the rest
of the 57/58 season Jimmy had allowed himself to be con-
sumed by work. Manchester United had gone on, driven by his
spirit, thoughts of what had happened buried so that the club
could carry on its business. He worked twenty hours a day, he
never stopped to reflect. The Cup Final, the quest for results,
the blooding of new signings, and kids, getting Bobby moti-
vated again, to these tasks Jimmy turned. Away from the
thoughts of the awful tragedy.
Then, the Cup Final over, the long painful close-season
weeks beckoning with no distraction, it hit him with desperate
force: his golden apples were gone. His boys had been killed.
Duncan, Eddie, David, Billy, Mark, Roger, Geoff, Tommy
. . . he used to call them his golden apples. Used to tell Matt
weve got another one ripe, ready for the first team.
328
aa

_ Jimmy loved music, could play Chopin, Bach, Mozart or Cole
__ Porter, but the way the Red Devils moved him as they grew
from boys arriving with their little suitcases to men strutting
arrogantly across the great stadiums of the football world
moved his Welsh soul the way no music ever had, lifted the
melancholy from his spirit. They were magic. They were his.
Jimmy was the ultimate football man. He saw the poetry in
the game, also the prose. He was a teacher. The poetry was
theirs, he would make them pros. Little things: throw-ins,
marking, winning the ball back, the grim detail without which
all the talent in the world counted for bugger all, that was his
job. So, hed bollock them, affect  and often feel - anger. The
more gifted they were the more he would ram the message
home: give it to a red shirt, keep it simple, get the basics right.
Nobby gives an example: Jimmy knew the game, the detail
that could make the difference. In the European Cup winning
- team Shay and Tony Dunne were neat and clever round the
ball. Theyd track the winger down and instead of knocking him
onto the track or hoofing the ball into the stands, Shay and Tony
would just poke it out of play. Jimmy would have a go at them:
Put it into the stand, give yourself an extra ten or fifteen
~~ seconds to get organised for a throw-in. If you just touch it out
of play theyve got it back straight away and before you know
where you are theyre in your goalmouth and youre under
pressure. It seems nothing, but football is all about that kind of
professionalism, if you like, at one level.
Jimmy knew this other, uncelebrated essence of the beautiful
game. The brilliance was understood by everyone, but the real
player did all the business, the hard detailed persevering bit,
competing, that was about concentration, the unspectacular,
the foundation on which the glorious is built. People said he
didnt see the larger picture  Matt was the one. Players who
grew up with him, the lads who died, Nobby, Bobby, Shay,
Wilf, all knew that the larger picture wouldnt exist without the
other properties of the professional game, passion for the cause
_ being, perhaps, the most important thing, Jimmy inspired.
Murphys life revolved around the dressing-room and train-
ing ground at Old Trafford. Matts perspective was necessarily
329
broader. They were a perfect team because they brought such i
different qualities to the task of building a football club. Alas,
since Munich Jimmy had never really had a role. Wilf, Johnny
Aston and Jack had done alot of the work he used to do. He was
very much involved but the old fiery intensity was significantly
diminished. He found himself often in a suit, reflecting rather
than looking forward.
The club changed when the buying started. You could hardly
call Setters, Quixall, and the other expensive signings golden
apples. There was no time to grow golden apples now;
Jimmys simple gospel seemed trite to the new men. Give it toa
red shirt. Oh yeah! So whats new?
Through the Bollock Chops years Jimmy would think back.
He missed Bert, old Bert his closest friend. The Methodist
_preacher and the devout Catholic, different but the same,
caring, tending their lovely orchard. And old Tom Curry, he
missed Tom badly too. Tom, Bert and he would have their
lunch together most days, beneath the stand in the old hut they
called an office. Bill Inglis and Arthur Powell, the five of them
were friends. . . not pals. . . friends. . . football men. . . not
politicians. This was the soul of the old club. This simple life
such a contrast to the glorious fervour of Old Trafford on match
days, no clamour, no glamour, just the stuff of an ordinary day
in Manchester United life.
Matt existed on another level. He had created this environ-
ment but wasnt of it. Jimmy was. This wasnt an academy. This
was a home, a human place. The big idea was to shape the
character of gifted young men, to teach the seemingly hum-
drum lessons required to be a professional. You didnt have to
teach them how to play, they knew that before they arrived.
What you had to do was gently remove the layer of schoolboy
conceit, keep your eye on the bullies and blackguards, make
sure that the environment was hospitable to lads with good
character who wanted to be footballers, who were willing to
learn the simple lessons. The big idea was that men of good
character, honest, determined, and dedicated, would grow in
human terms and thus a natural gift would blossom, be
fertilised by a healthy spirit. The idea was to create a sense of
human values so that men wouldnt spit in young fans faces.
330
The agenda changed. Jimmy and Matt, never close, grew
further apart as time went on. Matt was in another kind of
business, necessary but different. Jimmy had only been in the
Cromford Club once, for Roger Byrnes wedding. He took his
leisure in the Throstles Nest in Whalley Range, in the bar rather
than the lounge. He drank too much. To kill the pain of
disappointment. Often after games hed talk with the old boys
Bobby, Wilf, Shay, Harry Gregg and the best of the new men,
Denis, Paddy, long into the night in a hotel on the road after a
game Jimmy would reflect on what had made United great. . .
great .. . and lovely. His eyes would fill with tears: Whats
happening? He meant to the club. The old lads loved him in a
very special way. They respected Matt, were in awe of him; they
loved Jimmy. Because, as Bobby often said still says  Jimmy
made it what it was. He made them.
This was what Wilf determined to ignore. Not callously, but
the better to deal with new realities. Jimmy was hurt. Why? He
- could help. Now it was Wilf and Sir Matt. When Sir Matt retired
Jimmy was gone as well. Nobody asked him. Something would
be organised for him. Jimmy had six children and hed never
earned. Sir Matt told him he would talk to the Board. Jimmy
was not just in spiritual limbo, financially he was in a hole as
well. Hed turned down the Arsenal job, although tempted,
early in the Sixties, and many others, some offering financial
security. Now he was adrift, uncertain, dependent on the
board! Jimmy knew the score. Sir Matt was the Board.
Wilf got Jimmys office; Jimmy moved in to share with Joe
Armstrong. Wilf changed the training pre-season. More short,
sharp stuff, Wilfs ideas, new ideas illustrated on the black-
board. United had a great pre-season. The spirit was good on
the training ground, they won the friendly games handsomely.
Then the real stuff began.
They drew at Crystal Palace on the first Saturday. Then lost
2-0 at home to Everton on the Wednesday, and 4-1 to
_ Southampton at Old Trafford on Saturday. It was time to grasp
another nettle: two nettles, a handful. Bobby. And Denis.
Bobby had played poorly in the first three games. People were
running past him in midfield. The arrow-like passes werent
331
reaching the target. He was thirty-one coming up to thirty-two. |
Maybe he was gone. Maybe not. Wilf dropped Bobby and Denis
for the return midweek fixture at Goodison. Harvey, Kendall and
Ball had strolled through the previous weeks game. The Chief
Coach didnt consult the General Manager. Popular Bill was left
out as well. He'd played his last game for United.
The omission of Charlton and Law was a big story. Wilf
replaced them with two home-grown lads, Don Givens and
John Aston, whod been in the wilderness since Busby bought
Willie Morgan for 105,000 in August 68. Morgan was the new
George Best. That was his claim, which the papers took up. He
had long hair, a pretty face, wore the gear, and was tricky on the
ball. Wilf didnt fancy Willie: Willie was not as good as he
thought he was, but to be fair to him he was not as bad as I
thought he was either. But he didnt drop him. Paul Edwards,
another youngster, replaced Bill Foulkes.
Everton took them apart, 3-0, could have been more.
Everton went on to win the Championship, but in these early
days of 69/70 their quality was not proven. The result looked
worse that it was. The morning after Goodison, Wilf went to see
Sir Matt:  What took you so long? he asked me. I told him
we needed a couple of players. We talked about Bobby and
Denis. You could see Denis was struggling, but Bobby would
have to be put back in the side.
Sir Matt agreed about new players. He came up with a name:
Ian Ure, Arsenals Scottish international centre-half. I didnt
fancy him, Wilf admits, now this is what happened. Dont
forget I love this man. If you look at the video of the Benfica
game at Wembley you'll see me clapping him. Not the team;
him. So were in the office and he says, Ill give Bertie Mee a
ring. He picks up the phone and says, Bertie, its Matt here
again. Hello, I thought . . . again!
Wilf was confused. I thought I must be imagining this. All of
a sudden theyve agreed a price, 80,000. That afternoon, Wilf,
Jimmy and Sir Matt travelled to London to clinch the deal. Wilf
consoled himself by reasoning, Well we needed players, the
old mans not a bad judge. Jimmy didnt offer an opinion then
or afterwards. So I got Ian Ure, and funny enough we went
eight games unbeaten after that.
332
_ Doubts about Deniss fitness proved to be well founded. He
played only ten League games, scoring one goal that season.
Wilf had to manage without Nobby Stiles as well in those first
trying months. Nobby, always plagued by cartilage trouble, had
undergone another knee operation. Wilfs plan was to blend
experience  Bobby, Paddy, Alex Stepney, George, Tony
Dunne and Dave Sadler  with youth  Brian Kidd, Don
Givens, Carlo Sartori and John Fitzpatrick. This, plus a bit of
organisation and a couple of new players, would see him
through.
A number of problems arose. The new players were the most
obvious difficulty. Buying players was a grey area. Soon the
picture became clear. He told Sir Matt hed like to buy Malcolm
McDonald from Luton to provide the goals Denis couldnt now
score. Sir Matt, Jimmy and himself went to Luton. Matt and
Jimmy went on the terraces with caps and dark glasses: Im
sure they didnt fool anyone, Wilf laughs. He wanted
McDonald. Sir Matt agreed to do the business. The news was
bad. Liverpool had an option on McDonald, Wilf was in-
formed. United had second option. One morning Wilf read in
the papers that McDonald had gone to Newcastle!
Wilf wanted Colin Todd from Sunderland: Id worked with
Colin with the England under-23s. I thought he was the best
young defender Id seen for ten years. The price was phenome-
nal, 320,000 or something. Matt poo-pooed it. We cant
afford him. Thats an outrageous price Wilf was told. What
about Mick Mills of Ipswich. Sorry.
Wilf got the message. Frustration built up. He was in a hole
and didnt know the way out. Football was a bloody hard game.
The fans expected, newspapers blabbed on. Little did they
know. They had their own perceptions. So did the players who
didnt know the story either. The buck stopped with Wilf
McGuinness who had the responsibility but not the power
required to do the job the way he wanted to. Frustrated, he
occasionally lashed out. He still played cards on the coach. One
day he and Willie Morgan had a noisy disagreement over a hand
of cards. Tut-tut, the senior players thought. It wasnt good for
the young either. There were gulfs in the camp, significant gulfs
of a kind Sir Matt would have recognised from his playing past.
333
The senior players didnt stop playing for Wilf as stories had
it; these were great pros  Bobby, Denis, Paddy  they weren't
kids about to sulk. Two things happened: the inspiration Busby
had provided couldnt be artificially induced. That was singular,
his magic, which could not be manufactured. Alas, it was that
thing that had made them great players. They were gifted of
course but the spiritual side of greatness, the Other Side, had
been the essence of Manchester United magic. Intangible,
indefinable, potent beyond imagining. Busby.
Wilf offered organisation, a poor substitute for Busbys
potion. Denis Law explains: It is wrong to say we didnt try for
Wilf. There was a vacuum when Matt packed it in. Nobody
could replace him. All of a sudden weve got blackboards,
team: talks become very complicated. We are worried about the
opposition, their free-kicks, their throw-ins, their corner-kicks.
People started to worry before games. We didnt flow any
more. Fear crept in. This was Deniss perception. Wilfs was
that Denis couldnt flow any more.
Paddy thought Wilf was a good lad who got the job too early:
He was very excitable. The kids he brought in werent good
enough. I felt sorry for Wilf. He was too close to some of the
players  Bobby, the Bomber [Shay Brennan so-called because
he wasnt a bomber type defender]. Paddys perception is that
Bobby was Wilfs biggest enemy at Old Trafford: Bobby talked
behind his back to the Boss and Louis, Paddy says. Theres no
real evidence to support that view, although there is evidence
that Bobby did get involved later.
Nor is there any reason to suppose, as many do, that Wilf was
being undermined in another way by Sir Matts socialising with
senior players. Not Bobby who had too much respect for The
Boss to dream of drinking with him, but Paddy, Alex Stepney
and Willie Morgan who played golf with Sir Matt at Davyhulme
on a Sunday and often shared a table with him at the Cromford
on a Saturday. This bothered Wilf: I once dropped the three of
them and they were golfing with the Boss on Sunday morning.
That was something, a little obstacle. For one thing everyone
still called him Boss. I was supposed to be the boss.
Bobby Charlton, still a leading player in the Manchester
United story, is cautious about those times. An injudicious
334
word or comment could have consequence beyond meaning.
Bobby is a good man, a great football man, United through and
through, a curious, singular man, part Busby seeing the big
picture, part Jimmy, the best of both his mentors, with a special
stubborn vision of his own. Wilf is a good lad, Bobby shrugs.
It was the wrong time for him. Although he doesnt say so, or
even hint, its clear that Bobby didnt approve of Wilfs
appointment. Nothing personal, theyre blood brothers from
the days of Friday fishnchips and pictures in Town. But both
have seen the world, the world of power, fame and glory; the
bloody hard world of professional football that vanishes you as
ruthlessly as an Air Crash if youre not watchful.
A certain toughness is required if you are to survive. Bobby
had it, so did Denis. Jimmy didnt, Giles did. Matt invented it.
Wilf never really had that hardness. World, he smiles, Im a
dreamer, at least I was. You learn later that the world is a big
place but at the time Manchester United was my world, that was
it; mainly because of all the lads whod died in the crash, wed
grown up together, you can see how easily that could bind you
to the club. When John Giles said to me, Maybe Matt will
change his mind, but I wont, it shocked me, I couldnt believe
- he wanted to go. These feelings clouded a lot of things; unrest
with the players, my dealings with the Boss. I was sure of one
thing, hed stand by me. I had three years.
George Best was the other constant: George was brilliant,
Wilf recalls, some days when it was bad I used to just pray for
George to do it. And he did. At Sheffield were two down with
five minutes to go and up he pops, makes one, scores one.
Thank God, I thought.
George was better than ever those first few months. Stunn-
ing. Goals, he ended the season leading scorer with fifteen
League goals, and all the rest of him: competitive, tormenting
the kickers, lighting up United on the bleakest afternoons. I
still loved playing, George explains. He was dating Miss World
by now, beginning to become disenchanted. One of the reasons
was the absence of new players. Good players were needed.
The team was starting to grow old. They had opportunities to
sign players and I couldnt figure out why a club as great as
Manchester United that had five great years from 63 to 68
335
wouldnt spend whatever was needed. George blamed Wilf.
He also saw the other things: I felt the back-stabbing going on.
The dressing-room was unhappy. Playing used to be the
greatest high in life, especially for the Boss, I never felt the
same respect for Wilf, although I liked him. Georges uneasy
feeling about the game dated further back, to 66: Football
started to become a chore at some stage during this period.
Kickers and systems. I was coming off the pitch with mixed
emotions when Wilf took over. I knew I was playing well but we
were losing. I was training hard but I wasnt enjoying it like I
used to. The fun went out of it, people started bickering,
slagging each other off, then there were fights, fists-up jobs.
From my point of view I wanted to do it for Wilf, he deserved it
because of all hed been through for a club he loved. Most of the
young lads felt like that but the older ones didnt.
Despite all the difficulties Wilf did well in his first season,
thanks mainly to George. United finished a respectable eighth
in the League and reached the semi-final of the FA and League
Cups. They lost to City in the League Cup. The FA Cup run
really took off after they beat City 3-0 at home in the fourth
round. In the boardroom afterwards Wilf was so excited he
vomited on the floor. Thats how much it meant to Wilf.
The semi-final of the FA Cup against Leeds United went to
two replays. Leeds were still wicked but quality was emerging,
with Giles replacing Collins in midfield and Lorimer, Eddie
Gray and Terry Cooper maturing. The first game ended 0-0.
The replay was at Villa Park on Monday 23 March 1970. A
fateful day.
They had lunch at a hotel in Worcester. The plan was to have
a sleep after lunch. George had a different plan. She was a doll,
sitting at the bar as they ate. Everyone could see him clocking
her, Nobby recalls, It was obvious what was going to happen.
Things were bad at the club as George remembers: We had
started drawing lots to see who wed room with. I refused to do
it. So he was booked with Dave Sadler.
The lady at the bar was about thirty. She looked what she
was, a businessmans wife. He was at a conference in another
part of the hotel; she sent the right signal to George. They
disappeared. Semi-final afternoon. This was bad form, and
336
someone blew in Wilfs ear. He went hunting. George wasnt in ~
his room, but the ladys room was next door to Bobby and
Nobby who were sharing. Wilf knocked them up. They thought
hed gone daft, for he didnt tell them what he was up to.
Instead, hushing them to be quiet, he put his ear to the bedroom
wall. Nobby thought he knew. Bobby claims hes forgotten the
incident. They looked at each other, wondering has this guy
gone or what?
The bastard, Wilf screeched. He now knew where George
was. George wouldnt open the door, so Wilf went down for the
pass-key. He threw George out, stared her down and went
downstairs to have a whisky at the bar: I needed a drink while I
figured what to do. Heres my best player, hes done great for
me and hes in bed with a bird a few hours before playing Leeds.
Leeds! So, I went to Busby: What should I do? 
What do you want to do? Sir Matt asked him.
Play him, Wilf replied. Do the players know? Busby
enquired. Wilf didnt think they did. Leave it to me, The
Boss told him. To this day I dont know what Matt said to him,
Wilf declares. The players soon found out. Dave Sadler knew
anyway: It was not the first time, but he always did the
business. He was amazing. The atmosphere was fraught on the
way to Villa Park. The Leeds players found out about Uniteds
trouble: We knew, John Giles confirms, we thought it was a
disgrace. Even though it might work in our favour, we still
thought it was serious, out of order.
Nobby wonders: I think it might have been a set-up by
Revie, he asserts. Leeds were: thought to be capable of
anything.
It was a classic match, Giles recalls. Wilf agrees: We really
played. George had a nightmare. And he got the chance. He
missed it: Any day of the week youd fancy George to do it
especially on the big night, Wilf ruefully explains.
Leeds won the second replay. Chelsea won the FA Cup.
Wilfs lifespan shortened by a considerable distance. The older
players blamed him. George admits: Im ashamed of many
things and that is one of the worst. But Id been doing it for
years. He was sick of the cliques, the bickering, I was longing
for someone to come and sort it out. Nobody came.
337

a
a
TA

At the end of the season Wilf McGuinness and Sir Matt sat :
down to work out the retain and transfer list. Shay Brennan was
getting a free transfer. They could have looked for a fee but a
free would enable Shay to make a few quid. Shay was a
gambler. He needed the money. Because he was fond of a bet -
to say the least - United wouldnt give him a testimonial match
but a pension for life: 20 a week. Before inflation, before the
oil crisis in 1973 this was decent. Giving Shay a free was part of
Wilfs nettle-grasping operation. Shay was best man at Wilfs
wedding; Wilf best man for Shay.
Shay loved United. He didnt want to go. At thirty-one he felt
he was OK for a couple more seasons. That summer the club
were off to America on tour, and Shay had been fitted for his suit.
The end of the season was always a tense time at a football club 
judgement day. Shay was well pleased, his fitting for a suit was a
good sign, and Jimmy had marked his card. ? 'd never been
Jimmys type of player, Shay explains, but wed often spent the
small hours together. I was one of those who understood. The day
before the list came out, Jimmy, sensing I was on the borderline,
said, Dont worry, theyre putting Denis on the list, thats the
only big move. So I thought, great, Im OK.
They were at the Cliff, training finished, when Wilf called
him over: The Boss wants to see you. Sir Matt broke the news.
Wilf sat beside him stonefaced. Bang.
I'd known for days, I should have told him, Wilf admits, but
there was so much going on. It was stupid, but I thought I was
doing the business the right way.
Shay was sick. The world fell in on him. Leave the club!
Where would he go? Was it Wilfs decision? The Bosss?
Hurt, scared and confused, Shay went back to Old Trafford.
Jimmy was there. Come on, come upstairs, Jimmy said. They
went up and sat at the back of the stand. Jimmy was consoling.
Hed been blown out himself, and he knew what Shay was
feeling. Suddenly Jimmys anger and hurt burst out: Hed
never had a go at the Boss before, but now it poured out, Shay
recalls. I think he needed someone to talk to more than I did.
He pointed to the ground, Look at this. . . all of it, J built this
fucking place, we built it: Bert, Tom, with our bare hands. . .
and now.  Tears flowed. Jimmys and Shays.
338
During the summer Wilf McGuinness was given the title of
Manager. Nothing changed except the title. He tried again to
sign Mick Mills from Ipswich, but he couldnt persuade Sir
Matt. This is why he feels he failed. I should have been stronger
but I was in awe of him, Wilf admits. With two years of his
contract left, Wilf felt he could afford to experiment, blood the
youngsters. Jimmy Rimmer replaced Stepney in goal. Paul
Edwards got a run at right-back. Denis was in and out through
injury. Bobby played every game. George was still doing it.
Two days after Christmas Wilf was sacked. He was.
destroyed. There had been some noise in the newspapers,
speculative stuff, nothing serious: I wasnt worried. I knew Sir
Matt would stand by me no matter what. No two ways about
that. It came as a hell of a shock. United reached the semi-fina!
of the League Cup, losing the two-legged tie to Third Division
Aston Villa: We were due to play the first leg at Villa Park but
there were power-cuts so that was switched to Old Trafford. We
drew. They beat us 2-1 in the second game. That was 23
December.
Wilf looked terrible, Paddy Crerand recalls: The change in
his appearance was unbelievable. Hed come in on a Monday
morning with his eyes down around his cheekbones. He looked
as if he had the world on his shoulders. Sir Matt got more
involved in the final few weeks: I welcomed that, Wilf says. I
felt a closeness between us. He was helping me. We went over
the team together for the Villa games. He said a few words in
the dressing-room before the second match. I thought he was
trying to help not hinder. I was quite happy to let him help.
United drew 44 at Derby on Boxing Day. The following day
Sir Matt sent for Wilf:  Wilf, he said, things havent been
~ working out. The Directors have asked me to take charge
again. I couldnt believe it. I said, Ive got a three-year
contract. He said, Well end up in Second Division. I had a go
at him. I wasnt going to give up easily. I wasnt a quitter. I must
have swore at him. We were in there about an hour.
Wilf was told to report to the ground at six oclock for a board
meeting. He could have his old job back. He cant remember
much about the next few hours. Before the meeting, at which a
339
a
draft of a statement was to be agreed, Wilf found himself in the 
boardroom. It was four oclock: I phoned my wife Beryl. I told -
her it was over. She was pregnant with our third child. My
father-in-law had cancer. To me it was the end of the world. I
looked around for the whisky bottle. All I could find was sherry.
I had several glasses. I remember getting up and actually
banging my head against the wall. I thought I was going insane.
Jack Crompton came in as I was hitting my head off the wall. He
said, What are you doing? I told him it was all over. The Boss
had sacked me. I was heartbroken. I didnt want to cry in front
of Jack. I was in a daze, everything was blurred at that moment.
I called my dad. At six oclock Wilf attended the board 
meeting. It was the first time Id attended a board meeting. I
left that to Sir Matt.
His mood changed: I loved the club. I didnt want to hurt
United, people like Alan Gibson, hed cried when we lost at Villa.
He was upset for me. So I said, Im sorry it didnt work out. Then I
thanked them or something daft, there were handshakes all
around. We agreed that the statement would say I'd asked to have
my old job back. I was home by seven oclock.
At home with Beryl, and his father who came to comfort him,
Wilfs mood changed again: I thought, this is not right, this isnt
me, I wouldnt give in. People knew I wouldnt give in, I wasnt
like that. So I phoned Sir Matt. Jean answered the phone. I told
him I'd been thinking and talking to my family. I wouldnt
resign, theyd have to sack me. He said OK, come in at nine in
the morning and well draft a new statement.
The players were told in the gym at the Cliff before training.
Sir Matt made the announcement. When hed finished, Brian
Kidd, a Collyhurst lad like Wilf, turned to the senior pros: You
lousy bastards, youve let him down.
I said, now now Brian, come on, were all United here, Wilf
ruefully remembers. The press came in. How do you feel?
they asked. I said, Im still United, if you cut me I bleed red.
And I thought, what am I saying, thats crap. But I was still
trying to protect them. Really I would have done a better job if
I'd been more myself.
Sandy Busby was a close friend of Wilfs: Sandy was great.
He came round to see me and said, Have a holiday on the club,
340
_ take Beryl and the kids and just get away for a while. He was
_ feeling for me. I didnt know what I was going to do. Every time
I thought about it I filled up. I was still in love with the club.
_ Bill Foulkes had the job Id been doing with the reserves. Sir
Matt said, Do it together. I thought, Oh no, you cant do
that. He said, Give it a try. I tried it for a couple of weeks. It
was a disaster. Bill was giving half the team-talk, then Id come
in. It was a joke. One day at Burnley, hes talking and Im
waiting to have my say. There was a kid called Kevin Lewis and
Bill was steaming into him, too strong. So I said, you cant talk
to a Manchester United player like that. :
Wilf went looking for Sir Matt: He tried to avoid me but I
caught him on the stairs one day. Am I having my old job back
or not? I said. He said, Oh Wilf, bloody hell lad, dont you
think Ive got enough on my plate? 
Wilf left. He was offered the job as manager at Bolton with
Nat Lofthouse as General Manager: I thought, no thanks, not
that again.
Sir Alf Ramsey, footballs Public Enemy Number One,
called Wilf: He was a gentleman of the highest order, Alf. He
said, Dont mind the bastards, come down and have dinner
- with me. He offered me the job of managing the FA XI going
on tour to Australia, and playing Ireland at Lansdowne Road.
It would put me in the frame, get me going again while I was
looking for work. Alf was magnificent.
Wilf eventually took a job in Greece with Aris Salonika: He
started as a boy and left United as an old man, Tony Dunne
remarked. In Greece Wilfs hair started falling out. It grew
again, little white tufts, before falling out again. The doctor told
him it was delayed shock. In the end he was completely bald.
He was thirty-three, United through and through, and he
thought Busby was abastard. For a while.
17
The Outsider
It seems to me that someone from
the real world came in to Matts
fantasy world, at Old Trafford. They
were all part of the same family
circle. Really the club was a mess.
There was no reality to the myth.
: Frank OFarrell

Sir Matt resumed his post. Results improved dramatically.
United finished eighth in the League. George Best, who had
scored four goals during the first half of the season, scored
fourteen for The Boss between January and May. Denis Law
also enjoyed a purple patch ending the season second top scorer
with fifteen goals. Busby was back on a temporary basis. The
search for a new manager was on. According to conventional
wisdom the next man would have to be big enough to manage
Manchester United.
Jock Stein was considered suitable. Dave Sextons name was
also flagged, as was Don Revies. Paddy Crerand approached
Stein, known as the Big Man in the game. Celtic had
dominated Scottish football for several years as well as claiming
a European Cup. Paddy made the approach in Steins Glasgow
home. Jocks son was a United fanatic, but Jock himself was less
enthusiastic. Jock was wise in footballs ways, and he under-
stood Busby. He, Matt and Bill Shankly all came from the same
part of Scotland, the west, mining villages where football was
religion. They were great football men, but fly men also. Busby,
Stein and Shankly, each built great teams, great clubs. Each
was different. Each knew about the other, the man behind the
myth. Shanks was a fanatic, hard, passionate, a believer in the
glory. As John Giles puts it: If Bill hadnt been Liverpools
manager hed have been on the Kop roaring the team on.
342
a Shankly always came onto the pitch when Liverpool were
_ parading an FA Cup or Championship trophy round Anfield.
-Hed have a red and white scarf around his neck: Other
-managers would be fannying, Giles allows, Shanks wasnt. He
was a fan. He was no man-manager in the Busby mould. Ian St
John recalls: If you were injured he wouldnt talk to you. He
took it personally. You didnt exist. You were no use to
Liverpool Football Club. He lived for the game.
Shankly wasnt a worldly man. Sometimes hed tender his
resignation to the Liverpool board to force them to accept his
_ view on something or other. This was a game to Bill; they
couldnt do without him, he was Liverpool Football Club. In
1974 the board accepted his resignation, and Bill Shankly never
recovered. Within a couple of years he was dead. They say he
died of a broken heart.
Shankly wasnt fly enough. Busby and Stein, though, were
different propositions, more worldly men. They knew the
difference between glory on the pitch, beautiful football played
by great players and the clamorous noises from the terraces
and fame in the press or television. One was real, one was fake.
This distinction was important. You could be done without.
The only glory that mattered was the football on the field.
Asked once if he and Matt ever discussed the game, Stein
replied, Och, no I would nae embarrass the man. This was a
reference to Busbys presumed ignorance of the game in a
technical sense. He was only a manager of people. Jock could
talk you through a game, intricate move by move, telling you
who should have been doing this, that or the other when the
goal was scored or conceded. This was  is  called, Knowing
_ the Game. In that sense Jock knew the game, Jimmy Murphy
also. Matt didnt. But he knew something more important.
Sir Matt knew Jock. He knew that Jock was fly. But he
respected the football Steins teams played. It was Matts kind
of game. They met in a motorway cafe, and terms were agreed.
The only problem in Steins mind was the prevailing mood at
Old Trafford  the shadow of Sir Matt. He put a proposition to
Busby. Bobby Charlton and Denis Law were over the hill.
Jock felt it would be a bad start if he was the one to give them
the hard word. So if Matt would sort that out, then Jock would
343
: 4
come down. Sir Matt demurred. Still, Stein appeared willing to
take the job and they shook hands. The following day Stein
rang to turn the job down on the grounds that his wife didnt |
want to leave Glasgow. Paddy Crerand believes this was true.
Matt didnt. He thought Jock used the approach to up the ante
in his negotiations for a new contract with Celtic.
Dave Sexton was next on the list. Sexton took a while to 
reflect on the offer. In the end he said no, and Busby turned to |
Frank OFarrell. The Irishman had done a good job with
Leicester, before that hed been successful with Torquay. He
was the right type. Tough and impeccably behaved. Peter
Shilton had given OFarrell a hard time when Leicester were in
the Second Division and Shilton wanted away to further his
career. OFarrell made the goalkeeper honour his contract,
leaving him sitting in the stand when Shilton started uttering
threats. Busby was impressed.
Frank OFarrells integrity was well known in the game. In
this age of dodgy deals [like all the other ages! ] and Flash
Harrys, OFarrell played by the rules and eschewed big talk. He
was at this time negotiating a new contract with Leicester. He
was free and interested, not desperately interested, just
interested. Busby explained about Stein letting him down and
said he would like a quick decision. OFarrell, he said, would
have a five-year contract and no interference. Aware of the
prevailing view that his presence had inhibited McGuinness, Sir
Matt assured Frank that he would no longer be involved in team
affairs in any way as he intended becoming a director.
 The job is yours if you want it, he told me, OFarrell
recalls. I was flattered, I told him, but I asked for a day to think
it over. The salary was 12,000 a year plus bonuses for winning
trophies. After discussing the offer with his wife, Anne, Frank
accepted. He arranged to meet Sir Matt and Louis Edwards to
complete discussions. Secrecy was important to United, with
the Stein sting still fresh in Busbys mind, so they agreed to
meet at a hotel in Derbyshire.
Frank O'Farrell was forty-five, an experienced football
manager whod started out with Weymouth in the Southern
League after a good career as a wing-half with West Ham and
Preston. From Weymouth he joined Torquay where he
344
(4
achieved promotion from Fourth to Third Division for this
( small club. When OFarrell arrived at Leicester the club was on
} the way to relegation from the First Division. He inspired a Cup
run which took Leicester to Wembley in 1969 where they lost to
Manchester City. They were relegated, losing their last match
of the season at Old Trafford. OFarrell rebuilt, selling Allan
Clarke to Leeds, keeping Shilton and introducing some excel-
lent young players like David Nish and Rodney Fern to the
team. When United came for him Leicester had just*won the
Second Division impressively.
As a player at West Ham Frank had been a member of the
Academy, a group of players led by Malcolm Allison who
began discussing the new ideas of the mid to late Fifties. Dave
: Sexton, John Bond, Ernie Gregory, Noel Cantwell and Ken
Brown belonged to this group, Frank was a junior member,
Allison the guru. Malcolm had served in Austria on National
Service, hed seen the Continental way of doing things, we
knew the English game was years behind in terms of training
and technique, Frank explains.
After training every day wed go to this Italian cafe/
restaurant round the corner from Upton Park and discuss the
game. Over steak and chips wed move the salt and pepper pots
around the table devising new ways to play the game. This
group did influence English football, for good and bad, in the
coming decades. Moore, Hurst and Peters, nurtured in the
West Ham style, formed an essential element in Englands
World Cup winning team. Later Allison coached Manchester
City to a Championship, Dave Sexton and Ken Brown became
successful managers and Cantwell brought the new thinking to
Old Trafford. John Bond also rose to prominence.
Frank OFarrell was his own man. He listened but was never
- likely to be convinced by the likes of Allison and Bond who,
whatever he thought about their academic analysis of football,
were in human terms unappealing characters to this serious-
minded Catholic from Cork. Frank OFarrell is a staunch
Catholic, though his is a different form of Catholicism from that
widely practised in Ireland, the Latin countries and in
Manchester by men like Busby and Paddy McGrath.
OFarrells Catholicism is more commonly found elsewhere in
345
England and is more disciplined, less worldly than the norm for |
this faith. Subtle deals with conscience are out. Sin is not so
easily dissolved in the confession box. The slate cant be wiped |
clean by the few prayers offered to God in penance for sins |

committed. Your faith is taken seriously, is the foundation of
your character. Catholics like OFarrell do not, as most do,
regard their faith as some kind of convenience food for the soul.
Their Catholicism is a way of life, its values inherent in
everything they do. They dont commit adultery, lie and cheat
or otherwise play fast and loose with the tenets of their religion.
The Pope is infallible. Sin is not negotiable. Birth control is not
practised and priests who tell you that the pill is a matter
between you and your conscience, who are progressive, are
compromisers selling out on true Catholicism.
Frank OFarrells character was formed by this rigorous
interpretation of Gods intentions. He is a man of absolute
honour, unworldly to a degree. Everything must be done the
right way. Thus, he conducted the leaving of Leicester. The
Board were informed. When they offered to match Uniteds
offer, better it even, he explained that he had given United his
word and wasnt prepared to renege on that promise. Mr Len
Shipman, who was at that time chairman of Leicester City and
President of the Football League, the principal enforcer of
football law, was disappointed with OFarrell, didnt under-
stand this fastidious observance of unwritten agreements.
Frank O'Farrell was widely respected in professional football,
despite his honourableness. This belief in integrity, this fetish
for doing things right was regarded as a kink in his make-up. Of
course there were compensations; Frank wouldnt fuck you.
The problem was he wouldnt fuck anyone for you either.
He met Sir Matt and Champagne Louis in Derbyshire. The
hotel was full of people, so they drove out to the countryside
and stopped at a lay-by. Frank got into Edwardss Rolls Royce
and Sir Matt introduced his chairman. Frank thanked Louis for
the offer, repeated that he was flattered and sought confirma-
tion of the terms. So Matt repeats 12,000 a year plus bonuses,
Frank remembers. Big Louis interrupted . . . No, Matt, its
15,000 basic salary. Oh, yes, I forgot, Matt says. It was a
small chink, but OFarrell felt uneasy: It must have been
346
_ providential my asking, he declares. It bothered me alittle bit.
_ He could have forgotten the bonuses . . . but the basic salary?
_ They were a big club, looking for a manager, and they werent
sf
eas.
sure of the basic salary. I thought it was odd. I went back to
Anne and told her it was 15,000 not 12,000. She said thats not
a bad start, youve got a 3,000 rise before you begin!
Old Trafford was big. That was the first thing that struck
Frank. He stood on the pitch on his first day and looked around.
I was impressed by the size of the place. They were building a
new stand with Executive Boxes. There were big cranes all
around, it was like a building site. The building was incomplete
so Uniteds early season games would have to be played away
er
ee
ee
I from home. Sir Matt introduced OFarrell to Johnny Foy his
bookmaker friend: Johnny was a nice man, sincere, did a lot
for charity. We had dinner. I liked him.
That first day Frank decided to grasp his first nettle: Sir Matt
took me up to the offices. His was large and well appointed, it was
clearly the Managers Office. He showed me my office which was
small, down the end of the corridor. Alarm bells started ringing.
Frank understood the symbolism of the Managers Office in a
professional footbail club: Another fella might have bottled it,
but I thought Ive got to do this now. So I said, Matt this is not
right, and he was a bit taken aback. I was impressed but not
overawed by him. I was quite a confident person myself.
O'Farrell argued that it wouldnt be right for Sir Matt or for
him to allow these office arrangements to stand. He reminded
Sir Matt of the common perception that it was still his club: I
said if you stay in that office it makes my position look very bad,
it reinforces their belief that you are the real boss. Sir Matt
explained that he was keeping an office to deal with cor-
respondence and other bits and pieces unconnected with the
game: Well, I said, Matt, the Managers Office should be
recognised for what it is. . . the Managers Office. I said it in a
respectful way. He couldnt argue . . . so he said, All right, I'll
move my things out. It was a tough moment but I proved I had
the courage to face it. I was nobodys puppet.
Jimmy Murphy was one of OFarrells first callers: Jimmy
says to me, How did you get him out of here?  The sardonic
tone in Murphys voice rang another bell in Franks head.
347
Jimmys role at United had been clarified, unhappily from his
point of view. After a long wait he was offered 20,000, five
years salary, as a retirement settlement and a scouting job at
25 a week. The scouting post was really a sinecure during the
McGuinness/Busby regime just ended. Life would now be
financially difficult. In football terms hed been pushed to the
margins of the club he loved. He was almost a non-person. This
uncomfortable existence was made worse by the decisions
taken by the Board which Jimmy knew was really Sir Matt.
Hed never driven a car. For several years hed made the
journey from Whalley Range to Old Trafford and back in a
black taxi provided at the clubs expense. The fare was 3 each
way. Jimmy had recently received a letter from Les Olive-
informing him that this arrangement was being discontinued.
He was also informed that United could no longer pay his
telephone bills. The year before, his son Nicky had left United
after four seasons as a reserve player. Nicky recalls his fathers
hurt: My dad was never interested in money, but the football
side of things meant everything to him. He never said anything
against Sir Matt or the club, but he was very hurt. He couldnt
understand it. He had a lot to contribute. Without the taxi
Jimmy turned to British Rail: I know it sounds unbelievable,
Nicky confides, but for years after, Dad used to make the trip
without a ticket. The railway guards knew him so they never
asked to see his ticket. Hed just wave and walk through the
barrier. Nickys emotions are aroused as he tells this story.
Frank OFarrell rearranged the furniture in Sir Matts office:
There were low easy chairs for visitors which meant you
looking down on them from behind the desk. I created alittle
sitting area in the corner of the room where you could sit
together with people when they came in. He was particularly
conscious of this when Sir Matt called as Frank had invited him
to whenever he wanted: I didnt want to appear to be looking
down on him, so whenever he came in we would sit together in
the corner. I thought this was just good manners.
O'Farrell got off to a flying start. United lost just once in the
first thirteen League games. By December they were top of the
First Division. Everyone was happy. United were back. Frank
thought the revival was an illusion.
348
=
4
tmy
When I looked at the team Irealised their reputations were
better than their performances. The results were due to one
man: George Best. He was fantastic, OFarrell declares. He
really was. Before the end of November Best had scored
fourteen goals, including two hat-tricks. Not a man to indulge in
rhetoric, Frank OFarrell says simply: George was a genius.
But OFarrell believed Best was covering up a multitude of
sins. After some games we won when we shouldnt have I used
to say, Thank God for George. When OFarrell looked at the
wage-sheet he saw that Denis Law and Bobby Charlton were
earning significantly more than George: I called him in and
improved his wages out of respect for his ability. I didnt think
the situation I found was fair. OFarrell reported this and other
matters to the board: Johnny Aston was the chief-scout, he was
using his own car and being paid mileage. Nothing depreciates
quicker than a car. I thought a club like United should provide a
car for the chief-scout. So another item went on the agenda for
the board.
I was conscious that these things were a reflection on Sir
Matt and I didnt want to hurt him but the club had to have
decent values. OFarrell had no doubt about where power truly
lay in the boardroom: Louis Edwards was the chairman, but
Matt had him in the palm of his hand.
In January results began to reflect football reality as
O'Farrell had suspected they would. Thats when the friction
really started, he says. OFarrell had redesigned the team when
he arrived. Malcolm Musgrove had come with him from
Leicester as coach. They believed in working on the game
during the week, practising functional play in training, adopting
a rational team structure rather than sending teams out to play
it off-the-cuff. In OFarrells opinion this organisation, allied
to Bests genius, explained the good results early on. He
thought Bobby and Denis were past it and he didnt rate Alex
Stepney. Paddy Crerand was too slow for Franks taste and was
never selected during the OFarrell period. Frank sent him to
train the youngsters to get him out of the way as nicely as
possible. Willie Morgan was another iffy item in Franks view:
Morgan would sometimes say, Lets go out and play foot-
ball, implying that what I was asking for was not real football.
349

a
Se
Then aball would arrive at the far post and hed duck. I used to 
think, Get your head to the ball, thats football.
Looking objectively at Manchester United, Frank OFarrell
saw a mess that resembled a bad soap-opera. It was, he thought,
some family all right. So he decided to go to work. He told the
Board he wanted to buy Peter Shilton. This didnt go down very
well. There was money available for players but nobody would
tell him how much. He said it would cost 1 million to
reconstruct the team. He would have to replace Law, Charlton
and Stepney. United needed a central defender. And Frank
O'Farrell firmly believed he needed a captain, a leader,
someone, ironically, like Roger Byrne or Johnny Carey. Bobby
was the captain but OFarrell didnt believe that leadership was
Charttons forte. He admired Bobby as a man anda footballer,
but the Stepneys and Morgans were the dominant influences at
Old Trafford and Bobby seemed unable or unwilling to set a
different tone.
Of course Stepney and Morgan were more than mere
players. They were Sir Matts golfing and drinking companions.
There was a joke going the dressing-room rounds at this time
about Sir Willie and Matt. OFarrell didnt find this funny but it
did prove that the values he thought essential to a football club
were irreconcilable with the ethos of the family of which he was
now the head  at least as far as the public were concerned.
Musing aloud to Paddy Crerand one day about such things as
the. relationship between Sir Matt and certain players, OFarrell
was advised to get out and play golf on Sundays and Mondays.
He didnt play golf.
Denis Law was another problem. In Franks view his fitness
was questionable. The Law of old, the great player, was now a
shadow. Hed flash in and out of games, still splendid but only in
patches, his knee never right after 68. But Denis still thought
he had a lot to offer. Midfield was where he wanted to play, he
told OFarrell. The manager said no, he wanted Denis where he
was most effective: up front. Denis also wanted a long-term
contract. Again OFarrell disagreed. A one-year deal was all he
was prepared to offer. United collapsed in the second half of the
season to finish eighth in the First Division. After good runs in
the two Cup competitions they departed without disgrace in the
350

=
ae
Sd FA Cup sixth round and the fourth round of the League Cup,
__ replays being necessary in both instances.
They couldnt see what I could see, OFarrell says of the
United Board. Here another serious problem lay buried from
the publics view. The relationship between manager and
chairman is one of the most important in a professional club.
Protocol demands that the Board be kept informed about
football matters through the chairman. The corollary is that,
when seeking day-to-day guidance about transfers and other
things requiring expenditure, the chairman be the conduit of
club policy. OFarrell therefore dealt with Louis Edwards,
Uniteds chairman, whom he would telephone on a daily basis.
Although the realpolitik of Manchester United seemed clear 
that the chairman was in the palm of Busbys hand - Frank felt
quite properly that it wasnt for him to make assumptions as to
who was really running the club.
One day Les Olive, Uniteds secretary, told OFarrell that
there had been complaints about him not keeping the Board
informed. OFarrell was bemused. He had been in constant
. contact with Louis Edwards. Louis would immediately call Sir
Matt for advice before offering the definitive boardroom
opinion. So, Franks crime was the observance of football
protocol. Sir Matt was the source of the complaints. Sir Matt
hadnt told me at the beginning to ignore the chairman,
O'Farrell explains, if he had I might have acted differently.
In March 1972 Frank OFarrell paid Aberdeen 125,000 for
Martin Buchan. Having assessed the situation at Old Trafford,
nine months into his tenure OFarrell decided that the club
needed new players and a new image: I wanted professionals
with different values. Martin was an intelligent fellow with the
right attitude. Thank God, I thought, at last someone I can
relate to and talk to. The following week Ian Storey-Moore
was signed from Notts Forest for 185,000. Over the next few
months he bought Wyn Davis and Ted McDougall, the latter
from Bournemouth for 200,000. George Best played forty
League games scoring eighteen goals that season.
Reflecting during the summer, Frank O'Farrell realised he
had one hell of a job on his hands. He found it difficult to
reconcile the image of Manchester United with the pathetic
351
a
reality hed found. Frank was a tough, experienced pro but this -
place was incredible. It seemed to him that he had arrived from | |
the real world to disturb Sir Matt Busbys fantasy world. They |
were all part of the same family circle. The atmosphere was
hostile. Frank could feel it. His consolation was the five-year
contract in his desk. Martin Buchan was another ray of hope,
Franks Johnny Carey, his Roger Byrne, cast out of the same
mould as Busbys two great captains. Not one of the lads in the
accepted sense, Buchan preferred to read rather than play
cards. He enjoyed a joke, knew the day-to-day nature of a
professional club, had, indeed, grown up the son of a profes-
sional player. Buchan not only resembled Carey and Byrne, he
bore himself in the manner of the young Matt Busby. Thus,
OFarrell felt it all the more ironic that those from the dressing-
room who now appeared to influence Busby most disliked
Buchan the model professional. OFarrell believed that he and
his captain were being undermined by the relationship between
Busby, Morgan and Stepney. This was a reasonable conclusion.
Busbys contradictory nature was beginning to catch up with
him to the detriment of dressing-room morale.
Instead of playing golf, or socialising in the Cromford Club,
Frank OFarrell did his duty: If I had free time Id spend it
promoting Manchester United, giving talks to Supporters
Clubs, presenting prizes and generally projecting what I
believed was the right image for the club in the community.
Season 72/73 began badly and things deteriorated from
there. Bobby Charlton, who had played forty League games the
season before and scored ten goals, was club captain. Like
George Best and Denis Law, Bobby was in a curious position.
None of these great players was a confidant of Sir Matts. Law,
Charlton and Best respected Busby too much to glibly invite
him for a drink, a meal, or a game of golf. Paddy Crerand, on
the other hand, was close to the Busby family in a natural way,
being regarded as Jean and Matts adopted son. OFarrell had
alienated each of those men for different reasons.
George Best was sick of carrying the team on his back, and
was becoming increasingly blatant in his disregard for the
norms of professional footballs discipline. The slide from
misdemeanour to outrage was not as rapid as is commonly
352
i : perceived. George lived for football. Although disenchantment
set in during Wilf McGuinnesss period as manager, he
continued to perform magnificently. He was leading goalscorer
for United for four seasons after the European Cup win of 68,
missing only a handful of games. George was not deemed to be
living like a professional should, but he was certainly playing
like a pro.
David Sadler had by now married and left Mrs Fullaways.
He and George remained close. Sadler explains dressing-room
reaction to Bests initial adventures: Well, it was difficult.
Around the time of the Villa Park incident I started to get a bit
resentful of George. I thought he was wasting that great talent
and sticking two fingers up at the rest of us who were less gifted
but more diligent in our approach to training and preparation
__ for games. We had words. He reacted, more or less saying sod-
off, I'll live my life the way I want to. And to be fair to George
he was putting bonuses in our pockets and he was probably the
only one doing it. That goes back to Wilfs time.
I remember Tony Book writing an article in the Evening
News saying George was shitting on his team-mates etc. and we
all thought, hold on a minute, its all right for us to have a go at
him, but not an outsider. So there was a paradox there.
A more significant paradox was that during the
McGuinness/O Farrell years George Best was the best player in
the club, doing his stuff in style while senior professionals, who
were consciously or otherwise undermining the two managers,
used George as a scapegoat for Uniteds troubles. McGuinness
and OFarrell thanked God for George. He wasnt the problem,
but he was a convenient target for journalists and senior players
at United who sought to explain the clubs downfall in terms of
one mans unprofessional behaviour. The illusion thus created
persists.
Frank OFarrell thought George a likable lad. Martin
Buchan contrasts Best with his putative clone Sir Willie
Morgan: George was a wonderful player. They all made a good
living off his back, the poor lad never had a youth really. When I
arrived the press had him marked asa villain, it was nearly over
for him. But George was coming in after the games every
Saturday with his legs black and blue from the kickings he was
353

$a
&
getting and he wouldnt even report to the physio, just go out |
and do his training and go his own way. And there would be  |
Willie Morgan in the corner mouthing off. . .
O'Farrell remembers George at this time as a kind of lost
soul. Hed stay out training longer than anyone, he was a good
trainer, obviously loved the game and would still be out
shooting in with the apprentices long after the others had gone
home. I dont think George had anywhere to go.
Shortly after Dave Sadler left Mrs Fullaways, George moved
into a new house designed to his tastes. The dream home
became renowned in Manchester. Life within was nightmarish:
I was becoming a loner, George recalls. About 1970 things
started to get worse. It was gradual. I was drinking more,
staying out later. When Wilf was manager I would go off on my
own on a Friday night in London. I started going to the theatre.
Some of the lads would stay in the hotel or go to the movies. I
preferred the theatre, see a play, have a couple of lagers. But I
always got in before eleven oclock.
Girls were his only indulgence at the beginning. Girls rather
than women. Most of them were just good-looking. For George
women didnt simply equal sex, although if that was how it
looked from the outside thats how he preferred it to look. Girls
were an escape. At first he used them to live the fantasy most
men grow up with. Then the novelty wore off, the loneliness
grew worse, and the girls started using him. A date with
Georgie Best guaranteed front-page coverage, a spread in the
gossip section being second prize. He was a male bimbo. He
was bored.
I started having a few quid on the horses and going to
casinos. Not because I was particularly interested in gambling,
just for the buzz. The boredom was personal and, worse,
professional: I was bored with football, with all the nonsense
at Old Trafford. Id been in love with the game all my life, now
it felt like Id lost something; as if youd been married for twenty
years, then all of a sudden its over.
The scene in Manchester offered endless opportunity for a
famous man seeking temporary relief from boredom. Georges
life began to revolve around a pub called the Brown Bull on the
Salford/Manchester border. This was a high-life, low-life scene,
354
reflective of Cottonopolis as it had remained through the
_ passage of the decades. A fun town. The Brown Bull was a
home for those who didnt belong anywhere else. Actors from
the nearby Granada Studios joined villains, dodgy bank-
managers, gamblers, journalists and other refugees from
suburban conventions. Jimmy Greer would have felt at ease in
this milieu. Sir Matt Busby and his pals  the less conventional
_ ones  would not have been offended by the scene in a bar
where human vulnerability was not frowned upon, was, on the
contrary, celebrated. Being flawed or, to put it more colloqui-
ally, slightly fucked up, was deemed essential to membership of
the Brown Bulls inner circle. George was happy here. He was
left alone, accepted for what he was perceived to be, Jack the
_Lad. A mythical monster had been created. George Best was a
prisoner of Georgie Best.
At first the monster was a media creation. Then insidiously,
through the years 65 to 71/2, the intelligent, gentle athlete
known to David Sadler and me and the youngsters hed grown
up with at Old Trafford, lads like John Fitzpatrick, Bobby
Noble and Jimmy Ryan - the real George Best  was isolated
from the people he was fondest of and the game he loved. Fame
allowed him to indulge some fantasies but it also detached him
from the friends of bowling-alley, snooker-hall days. Others got
married and settled to suburban existence, George hung out in
Town. A first team player, he was not ever really regarded as a
senior pro. He fell into a void somewhere between the factions
at United. The younger players, his old buddies, found it hard to
identify with the legend Georgie, yet at the same time the senior
players didnt take him seriously in terms of his opinions about
important matters. George Best was carrying them every week for
four seasons yet he was never in on the politics of Old Trafford the
way Sir Willie and Alex Stepney were. A bimbo outside,
George was something of a bimbo within as well.
He was only the greatest footballer in the world, European
Footballer of the Year in 1968, yet nobody consulted him about
training or tactics. And George was too timid to get involved
without invitation: I knew the club was a mess. It was burning
me up inside but I suppose I didnt have the guts to tell the great
man to his face.
355
During his slow descent George kept hoping that the club 
would sort itself out. The worse the mess became, the more he |
despaired, until in the end he was part of the problem, a
symptom, rather than a cause of the sickness. The world didnt
see things that way, neither did Sir Matt or Bobby Charlton.
Bobby was alienated from Frank OFarrell because the
manager wouldnt do something about George. OFarrell tried
but he was faced with a real dilemma: We were an inadequate
team without him, OFarrell explains. The first time George
went missing was before a cup-tie at Southampton. I fined him
but didnt drop him. We got a draw down there. In the return at
Old Trafford we were struggling. All of a sudden George scores
two great goals and weve won. OFarrell also felt an obligation
on a personal level: I thought I could help him or at least try. If
I failed that would be too bad, but I didnt think he was my most
serious problem, I felt for him in many ways. Even when
George lied to him OFarrell sympathised.
One day he came in after a spell on the run and told me he
was concerned about his parents in Northern Ireland. He said
theyd been threatened and so on. He claimed hed been to
Ireland to comfort them. OFarrell checked and discovered
this was untrue. Reassured by his five-year contract, OFarrell
resolved to sort George out when the time was ripe. OFarrell
now concedes that he might have acted sooner: I was anxious
to get rid of the George Best problem, it was a real distraction
and time consuming. It was also terminating Bobby Charltons
faith in OFarrell.
It was unfortunate for Frank to come into this situation,
Bobby admits. There was no way he could win. If he dropped
George he alienated the fans, at the same time the players were
complaining to me as club captain. Bobby took the complaints
to the manager. George was not only failing to turn up, he had
started messing on the training ground. At this stage OFarrell
was rarely at training. Malcolm Musgrove was popular with the
players but helpless, surrounded by a family at war. When
Bobby Charlton talked to OFarrell he got little satisfaction.
The manager, growing more exasperated by the day, told
Bobby that he should sort George out himself if training was
being disrupted. I didnt think he was a good captain,
356
_ OFarrell explains. They'd be practising set-pieces and George
_ would do something to cock everything up. And Bobby would
come in, Why are we practising if hes screwing things up? I
told him not to come moaning to me. Youre the captain with
one hundred odd England caps, if you cant control the
situation and work as planned dont come bloody moaning to
me. Push George out of the way and get on with it.
Bobby had been dropped by OFarrell earlier in the season.
O'Farrell admits that Charlton never stopped trying but simply
wasnt playing well, and though he had no ulterior motive for
dropping his skipper, Bobby thought otherwise: It was the Wilf
thing all over again. They all seemed to think that if they
dropped me it would prove something. Left out, Bobby
sulked, or so it seemed to the Morgan/Stepney tendency:
Bobby trained on his own for a while, OFarrell recalls, just
running endless laps of the pitch, talking to nobody. Stepney
came to me and said, Whats the bloody matter with him? As
you can imagine, it was some club to try and manage.
Denis Law was angry because he had been refused the four-
year contract hed sought. Nor was he able to play in midfield as
he wished to. Paddy Crerand knew he was being sidelined with
the youngsters. Paddy describes the atmosphere in the club that
autumn as dreadful.
Crerand thought OFarrell a very, very, nice man, but totally
lost. Looking at it from Franks point of view he was working
with ghosts really. The great man Matt Busbys still there,
Jimmys still there, Bobby and Denis are around and George
has gone. According to Paddy, Busby should never be blamed
for OFarrells downfall, which was rapidly approaching:
Anybody who claims Matt was involved in anything is telling a
lie, Crerand insists. Matt never interfered with Frank
O'Farrell. Bobby was the one who got Frank the sack. Bobby
was running to Louis Edwards all the time. If Frank wants to
have the needle with anyone it is not Sir Matt, but Bobby
Charlton. Matt didnt even know what was going on, Paddy
Crerand claims.
_ Bobby Charlton is equally loath to blame Sir Matt; I dont
think the old man wanted to get involved. I was as much to
blame as anyone for Franks dismissal, Bobby says.
354
The truth revealed by the denouement to this wretched saga 
is that Sir Matt Busby was intimately involved and well aware of.
everything that was happening. Bobby had gone to see The
Boss in his Kings Road house, the first time Charlton had ever
been inside the Busby home. The visit was at Sir Matts
invitation. Bobbys concerns were genuine, those of the great
professional he was. He could see that he was as helpless as
anyone else to halt Uniteds decline: I complained about
George, Bobby admits. I told Sir Matt the football world was
laughing at us and asked him to do something about it.
Bobby, he said, to err is human, to forgive is divine. 
Bobby Charltons hostility towards George was evident to all
at Old Trafford. The consummate professional was deeply
offended by Bests apparent contempt for the rules by which his
colleagues were governed. Reflecting on his mood at that time,
Bobby admits that in human terms he felt sorry for George:
Sometimes Id seen him looking as if hed been out all night and
part of me would be outraged yet at the same time I often
wanted to put my arm round his shoulder and offer him advice.
But everyone was doing that and I just couldnt bring myself to
make the gesture.
Busby had been monitoring events on the field and off. On 28
October United lost 41 at home to Spurs. That night the club
held its Annual Dinner Dance for the staff. OFarrell and his
wife Anne went along: You dont feel like socialising after a
result like that, but it was part of the job, Frank explains. Anne
went to the toilet just before the function ended. As she passed
Sir Matt on the way back OFarrell claims a remark was passed:
Anne only mentioned it on the way home. Hed said that I was,
an independent sod. Why dont you get him to come and talk
to me? I used to be like that but Frank shouldnt be that way
with me. I was annoyed. Why wasnt he man enough to come
and talk directly to me, I thought. Id always invited him into
the office for a cup of coffee so he had ample opportunity to give
me advice if he thought I needed it.
OFarrell tackled Busby on the Monday morning after
training: I waited behind and asked him in for a coffee. Whats
all this about me being an independent sod? OFarrell asked as
politely as he could. Busby ventured that Martin Buchan wasnt
358
"playing well. Hed been at fault for one of the goals against
_ Spurs. He also indicated disapproval of the omission of Bobby.
__ Charlton a few weeks before. OFarrell challenged him on the
_ Spurs goal: I probably sealed my fate that morning, Frank
_ speculates. He said Buchan should have been on the cover
_ when Chivers scored for Spurs. In fact, it was Buchan who
_jJumped with Chivers, and someone else who put the ball in the
net. David Sadler was the one who ought to have been covering
_ if anyone. Oh, he said, I must have got that wrong. Then he
_ questioned me for dropping Bobby. So, I thought, Ive got to
_ defend myself here. This OFarrell did, respectfully, but
_ firmly.
_. Then George Best took his most spectacular liberty to date.
_ He disappeared with the actress Sinead Cusack. Ms Cusack, a
member of the famous theatrical dynasty, was a cut above the
usual Best bimbo. She was an intelligent self-possessed young
woman with whom George fell madly in love. According to
_ Sineads television producer brother, Paul, the romance was
_ just an adventure for his sister: She got lots of publicity and
_ her career took off from that point, Paul explains. This wasnt
the scenario projected to the world via the national press and
television who covered the story as if it were a matter of
international importance. The couple were eventually dis-
covered and siege was laid on what was described as Georgies
Love-Nest.
Manchester United had had enough. Not Frank OFarrell,
_ but the real power behind the scenes: Sir Matt Busby. At a
specially convened board meeting the Best scandal was the only
item on the agenda. Busby spoke. He thought Best should be
_ placed on the transfer-list. Bobby Charltons opinion that the
club had become a laughing stock was being vividly borne out.
_ OFarrell, the manager, objected, politely as usual: I told them
not to do it. I still needed him. I said what will happen if
Manchester City try to buy, which I suspected Malcolm Allison
would do. . . and did. I also knew that this would be seen as my
response. I objected as strongly as I could but I was over-ruled.
_ From then on my position was weakened.
City did bid for George. As O'Farrell feared, he was blamed
for the decision. Newspapers talked about OFarrells patience
359
4

finally snapping . . . and of the manager facing up to the Best
problem at last. United valued George Best at 300,000. |
Newspapers editorialised about The Boy Who Couldnt Handle |
Fame. On the feature pages, where hed once been lionised,
George Best was now analysed. Agony aunts and uncles sought
meaning in the superstars sad  yet newsworthy  decline. 
Some told Georgie to come off it, some called him a spoiled
brat, the hero who died of self-indulgence. Best had been
given too much, too soon, and the results were, many wrote,
inevitable. For the conventionally wise, George Best was a gift
from the gods. Virtually all involved in this orgy of self-
righteousness agreed that Sir Matt deserved a slap on the wrists
for being too lenient with his prodigious star: Sort him out, Sir
Matt was another favoured solution. 
The one man who stood to benefit from the Best saga was,
ironically, Frank OFarrell. Had he chosen to, OFarrell could
have billed Uniteds troubles to George, taken the credit for
facing up to the problem and sought a fresh start. Alas, Frank
was too honest to adopt this ploy. He knew that having covered
up a multitude of sins in the team for four seasons Bests fall
from grace was but the symptom of a deeper malaise at Old
Trafford. A modicum of low cunning might have served
O'Farrell at this point, but alas, Frank was a straight shooter,
lost as Crerand explained.
Amid the media hysteria of the time one piece of journalism
stands out, a model of reasoned assessment, an objective,
informed insight into the reality behind the scenes at Old
Trafford. David Meek has been covering the Manchester United
story for the Manchester Evening News for almost thirty-four
years. David, son of a sports writer on the Yorkshire Post, was
pressed into service on a temporary basis when Tom Jackson died
at Munich. Hed joined the News as a political correspondent and
leader writer eighteen months before the Munich Air Crash. As
he had done some football reporting at weekends on his fathers
newspaper David was asked to fill the vacancy on Jacksons death.
He had no desire to be a football correspondent and accepted the
job initially as a stop-gap until the end of the 58 season. United
was, as he explains, a news story as well. So he stayed with it: It
was always going to be just another season.
360
Like many footballers I found Manchester United very hard
to walk away from, there was always something happening,
even in the unsuccessful years. Reflecting, David vouches that
_ every year has been different. Sometimes he feels embarrassed
_ to admit that hed been doing this job for over thirty years:
People say, What a terrible rut watching the same team every
week for thirty-four years, but I must admit I never felt like
that. The politics of Old Trafford, he concedes, intrigued me.
After a couple of seasons Matt Busby wrote to the editor of
the Evening News expressing satisfaction with Meeks work:
Old Tom Henry was the editor. He and Matt were pals. I was
congratulated and given a rise. The message was unmistak-
able: dont rock the boat.
David Meeks assignment was one of the toughest in
journalism for paranoia is endemic to professional soccer and
journalists are mistrusted, at best servile, at worst inventors of
stories designed to do the football man down. Few within
football understand the journalists role, those who do are
usually bullshit artists. Chronicling footballs affairs at close
quarters, for a local rather than national readership, is a tricky
business. A delicate balance between conflicting interests must
be preserved. The reporter must serve his readers while
maintaining a working relationship with the subjects of his
copy. Achieving this, in a civilised yet incisive manner, as David
Meek invariably did over a period of three decades, requires
the instincts of a good reporter and the skills of a diplomat.
Meek belongs to the school of gentleman journalist, the old
school. His work reflects his personality, urbane, objective,
sympathetic. The style is literate, the tone even. There are few
theatrical flourishes, no hint of behind-the-scenes intimacy.
The occasional scoop is welcome but by and large Meeks work
involves keeping his readers informed and the club reasonably
happy. Access is important.
Busby was usually pleasant in his dealings with David Meek,
_ though a certain distance was maintained. Meek travelled with
the team on coach or train and was privy to many things he
couldnt report without breaching the unwritten rules which
governed his difficult task. David sat on the coach and never
broke the rules, passing up many juicy stories down the years.
361
o

Busby remained affable on the surface, but he was suspicious |
of journalists and I was always kept at arms length, Meek ||
explains. This disappointed him slightly. He was anxious to |
learn more about the game, thought he might benefit from the |
great mans knowledge. I was raw in terms of football 
knowledge at the beginning, he recalls. Alas, no tutorials were
offered.
Ten years on Meek was still as he puts it a second-form boy. I
regarded Matt Busby as the headmaster, he had that aura about |
him. When you are around for so long you might expect to be
treated like a sixth-former, a prefect. You know the head-
master starts to talk to you man-to-man. But David never
became a prefect. Even when he was in his forties Busby was
still calling him David lad. Conflict was rare but not unknown.
In 1963 when there were rumours about Busbys position at the
club Meek sought an interview with Harold Hardman expecting
confirmation that the managers job was secure: I thought it
was inconceivable that United would dismiss him five years
after Munich. It was that confirmation I was seeking to nail the
speculation, Meek remembers. Hardman somewhat grud-
gingly gave the assurance Meek was seeking. Before I had time
to write the story Matt was on the phone. He said he wanted to
see me. The meeting in Busbys office was terse:  I know
what youre trying to do, he said, youre trying to get the
Chairman to say my job is on the line. I was shocked and
disappointed. Id always been supportive in general terms, and
the idea that I would go behind his back to do a story
undermining him was to misunderstand me completely. He had
obviously made the wrong assessment of me.
Meek found Busby an intimidating figure. I didnt like to
cross him. It wasnt that he would shout or make threats, but
one sensed an inner strength. When you were face to face with
him he was extremely formidable. I mean one could have said,
How dare you, Im doing my job without being unduly vicious
or unfair, but I dont know asingle journalist who ever
responded in that way.
After fourteen years covering Manchester United David
Meek knew the score. So when the Best/OFarrell story
reached its frenzied climax he was best placed to serve the
362
reading public. This he did by penning a piece for the Evening
_ News which attempted to place the lurid events depicted
elsewhere in some perspective. Meek liked OFarrell whom he
found personable and thoroughly decent. Having witnessed
the sacrifice of Wilf McGuinness at the same altar Meek wrote
that if blame were to be apportioned for Uniteds failure then
the buck should not stop with Frank OFarrell or indeed
George Best. I felt that sacking Frank was too easy. So I wrote
a piece pointing out that everybody at Old Trafford ought to
share the responsibility for Uniteds problems. Of course the
manager must accept some blame but the players also had to
answer for their performances. And Meek added the directors
made a mess of handing over from Busby to McGuinness
without preparing the young coach adequately. OFarrell, he
went on, had inherited a mess. Sacking him was no solution.
Now was the time to clear the air, issue a statement supporting
the manager and resolve that all at the club would work
together to solve the problems.
This article, filed in mid-November, was unfortunately timed
from the clubs point of view. Two days previously the Board
had decided to sack OFarrell. Meek had no knowledge of this
decision, but Sir Matt thought he had and was, as Meek puts it,
deliberately defying the club. He thought I was trying to
embarrass them. For this crime Meek was banned from
travelling with the United party, a sentence that stands to this
day.
The letter delivered to the Evening News offices was signed
by Les Olive on behalf of the board. Mr David Meek is no
longer welcome to travel on the team coach. The letter was
addressed to the editor, Brian Redhead, a journalist of the new
school: Brian was a tough character. He was outraged and
quite prepared to go to war on my behalf. You write exactly
what you want, he told me. I thanked him for the support,
there was no need to go to war, Meek recalls.
Behind the amiable, urbane exterior David Meek was a
courageous reporter. On a point of principle he continued his
normal working routine. He dined in the same hotel restaurants
and travelled on the same trains as the United team. He had a
job to do and wouldnt be cowed by the hostility now focused on
363
1
him. Busby and the other directors affected not to see him. ad
players, with one notable brave exception, ignored him. All but 
Paddy Crerand, who made a point of hailing him fondly when
they met. I will always remember Paddy for that, Meek says.
It was a difficult time and he spoke out and didnt care a toss
about whether it was politically acceptable or not.
O'Farrell was courageous as well. He would make a point of 
leaving the table in the restaurant to go over to David and 
inform him of team news.
David Meeks article suggesting that the directors get behind
O'Farrell forestalled the move to sack him. Having insisted that
George Best must go a couple of weeks earlier, Busby now
made the extraordinary decision that he must be forgiven and
brought back to Old Trafford. Frank OFarrell wasnt consul-
ted: The first I knew of it was when a journalist rang up to tell
me, George is coming back,  OFarrell recalls. OFarrell,
still observing protocol, rang his chairman. Edwards was
unavailable so he called Busby. Sir Matt confirmed the news.
O'Farrell argued that this U-turn was completely out of order:
I told him you cant do that without informing me. Im the
manager, whats going on? Busby replied: We need George
Best at Old Trafford.  OFarrell believes on reflection that
this blatant disregard for him was an attempt to force his
resignation. There were by now three and a half years left on his
contract. If he resigned United would save over 50,000. He
didnt panic, but the writing on the wall was becoming
increasingly clear.
Best recalls his meeting with Busby: He was always giving
me advice. People would phone up to tell him stories, he knew
everything that was going on in town. This time he started going
on about the Brown Bull, except he kept getting the name
wrong. First he called it the Brown Cow, then the Black Bull,
but he always got the colour  or the animal  wrong. I nearly
laughed but I thought I'd better not. Their relationship was
odd, intimate on an emotional level, practically non-existent in
terms of conversation: He was always good to me, no matter
how badly Id behaved. I remember once going to London for
an FA disciplinary hearing. I'd had a few drinks but I wasnt
drunk. I got suspended and on the way downstairs in the lift I
364
_ got sick. It wasnt booze, just emotion. He put his arms around
_ me and just held me. He didnt. say anything, he just seemed
genuinely sorry for me despite the trouble I caused him.
OFarrells execution was only postponed. Busby consulted
Denis Law and Willie Morgan about Tommy Docherty,
Scotlands manager. This controversial character had been
rehabilitated by outstanding work with the Scottish team which
he had already virtually assured qualification for the 1974
World Cup Finals. Law and Morgan had toured Brazil with
Scotland the previous summer. Both vouched that The Doc
was a reformed character.
On 16 December United travelled to London to play Crystal
_ Palace. The result, a 50 humiliation, was the excuse Busby
needed. Tommy Docherty attended the game. In the Palace
boardroom at half-time he was offered the United job. Getting
rid of Frank OFarrell was the next item on the agenda. United
were second from the bottom of the First Division.
O'Farrell had arranged a Testimonial match against Celtic
_ for Bobby Charlton in October. Celtic travelled from Scotland
attracting 60,000 to Old Trafford. A dinner to celebrate
Charlton was arranged for Monday after the Palace game.
Louis Edwards rang OFarrell that afternoon to ask him to go
on Granada Television to explain the Best situation. OFarrell
refused. There had been enough hysteria about George, we
should cool things down, OFarrell advised. He remembers
someone asking him that day if he felt secure? His answer was,
- Yes. He thought the outside world, the real world, could see
_ the truth of his circumstances: David Meek was great. They
_ went insane over his article. Brian James also wrote a sup-
portive piece in the Sunday Times. They were angry about that
as well. James, one of the most distinguished British sports
writers of that period was, OFarrell believed, voicing the
majority opinion. If United had become a laughing stock Frank
OFarrell was not to blame.
At the Charlton dinner Uniteds manager was not seated at
the top table. The room was ablaze with rumours of the
_ imminent sacking. Johnny Carey came over to Frank offering
words of solace: He told me Id done a good job but he said,
_ youve got a few problems.  Martin Buchan also talked to
365
5 :
Frank: Im going to tell the chairman that if they get rid of youl i
want out as well, Buchan said. OFarrell urged him not to do
anything.
The following morning OFarrell was instructed by Les Olive
to attend a board meeting at four p. m. Johnny Aston and
Malcolm Musgrove were also summoned. Aston picked
O'Farrell up at his Salford home. It was a glorious summer-like
day: Nice day for an execution, OFarrell quipped to his
chief-scout. It was 19 December, one week before Christmas
Day.
Louis Edwards broke the news: We are relieving you of your
duties, he told his manager. OFarrell asked why.
No reason, Louis replied.
Mi Chairman, I am not leaving this room until you give me a
reason for my dismissal, OFarrell retorted. Louis looked
across at Sir Matt. Busbys head was down, avoiding eye-
contact with his pal. Louis then admitted that OFarrell was
being sacked because of Uniteds League position. OFarrell
asked that this be recorded in the minutes. Wise in the ways of
professional football, Frank was thinking ahead to settlement
of his contract. As always, he was being correct. The meeting
concluded. Sir Matt had not spoken.
The headlines the following day reflected the scale of the
massacre. As well as OFarrell, Aston and Musgrove were
dismissed and it was announced, George Best will never play
for United again. United promised to honour the remaining
years of his contract in full. Frank went home.
Christmas would be bleak for Frank, his sacked colleagues
and their families. That evening a lorry pulled up outside
OFarrells home in Eccles Old Road, Salford: The lorry-
driver knocked on the door. He said, Ive just heard the news
on the radio and Ive come to say how sorry I am. Im a United
supporter and Im ashamed of them now. It was a lovely
gesture, Frank recalls. The following day there was another
knock on OFarrells door. Johnny Foy, Busbys close friend
had arrived with Canon, another of Sir Matts intimates: They
said were sorry for whats happened, Frank. We think youve
had a raw deal. This coming from Johnny who was as close to
Busby as anyone, who played cards with him in his house, I
366
really appreciated it. Johnny Foy had come bearing more
than condolences: He said you have a mortgage to pay and
children to bring up, let me give you 10,000 now to tide you
over until you get your settlement. This was the nicest thing
that happened to me during this period, OFarrell explains.
He refused the offer but promised to avail himself of it if the
need arose.
'Manchester United had not finished with Frank OFarrell
just yet. The torture continued. He received a letter requesting
that he return the club car, a Jaguar. He offered to buy the car
out of his compensation money. The next letter was from
Uniteds solicitors: They offered me 20,000 odd in settle-
ment. Frank consulted a leading Manchester solicitor. He felt
in a desperately weak position. Hed seen judges and barristers
drinking champagne in Manchesters boardroom, what chance
a fair hearing if he went to court? His advisor reassured him:
Dont worry, Im a City supporter. Frank was also told, You
will have to sign-on at the Labour Exchange to show that you
are looking for work.
I had been working since I was fifteen, I had never had to
sign on in my life. That hurt.
Eleven months later, after his case has been listed for court
hearing, Frank settled for 45,000, less 2,300 for his Jag. His
career in club management was finished, apart from a short
period at Cardiff where he went as troubleshooter to save the
Welsh club from relegation. Finally he went abroad to manage
the Iranian national team, successfully, winning the Asian
Games and qualifying for the Olympics.
O'Farrell determined never to be at the mercy of professional
soccer again: I thought if Matt Busby and Manchester United
are the good guys, what are the bad guys like? In the boardroom
after matches you'd see showbiz celebrities, prominent busi-
nessmen, priests, lawyers and judges all enjoying lavish hospi-
tality. At the same time they had taken Jimmy Murphys taxi
and telephone off him, and Johnny Aston the chief-scout was
driving his own car, the contradiction was sickening.
Sir Matt Busby never contacted OFarrell again: I didnt
want him to contact me, I never wanted to speak to the man
again. I have no time for that man. He hired me and he fired me,
367
despite the fact that hed told me at the beginning that the job
would take a long time.
Some people in Manchester will tell you that Frank OFarrell
is a bitter man. According to Paddy Crerand, OFarrell has a
poison against Matt. Frank was too nice to be a football
manager, Crerand believes. Another point of view was expres-
sed to Jean and Sheena Busby by a Catholic priest acquainted
with Sir Matt and Frank OFarrell: Thats a very wicked thing
Sir Matt has done sacking a good man like Frank OFarrell.
18
The Doc
I never did anything, I fell in love.
Tommy Docherty

In a work of fiction Tommy Docherty would serve as an ideal
villain. He is one of the most notorious characters in profes-
sional soccer. Busby chose Docherty to succeed Frank
OFarrell because he seemed big enough for the job of
managing Manchester United. Denis Law and Willie Morgan
were consulted. Martin Buchan, who also played for Scotland
during Dochertys reign, was not consulted. In similar circum-
stances in eras past, Matt Busby would surely have sought
advice from Johnny Carey or Roger Byrne.
There were sound reasons for appointing The*Doc. He had
an impressive track record in football management. At Chelsea
in the Sixties hed built a brilliant young team from such talents
as Peter Osgood, Terry Venables, John Hollins and Peter
Bonetti. This side had class, the same kind of wit and elegance,
distinctly Scottish, that Matt Busby valued. One night in
Blackpool, coincidentally in the same hotel United used,
Docherty caught eight of his team breaking the midnight
curfew. As they made their way up the the fire-escape The
Doc nabbed them and the following day sent them home in
public disgrace. He was impulsive. But he could nurture talent.
With Scotland he had shown himself courageous enough to defy
the parochial bigots who controlled the game up there by
selecting Anglos  Scots exiled in England, like Denis Law to
represent their country. Moreover, Docherty allowed his
players to express themselves. In that sense he was big, or at
least bigger than most. So one can identify Busbys football
rationale for turning to Docherty in his hour of need.
Docherty got off to a bad start with United being relegated to
369
the Second Division eighteen months after he took over. Since
enough blood had been shed over the previous three years, 
however, he was not sacked. The following season United won |
the Second Division playing scintillating football while averag-
ing crowds of over 50,000 at Old Trafford. In 1976 Docherty led
his team out at Wembley to face Southampton in the FA Cup
Final. United were long odds on to win. They lost 10, the goal
scored by Bobby Stokes against the run of play. In 1977 United
returned to Wembley, this time as underdogs, to face
Liverpool. A fluke goal credited to Jimmy Greenoff was
enough to give them victory. Six weeks later Tommy Docherty
was sacked. He had fallen in love with Mary Brown, wife of
Laurie Brown, Uniteds physiotherapist.
While understandable in football terms, Dochertys appoint-
ment is difficult to reconcile with the values Busby had always
sought to promote within Manchester United Football Club.
The Doc was famous for many things before coming to Old
Trafford, observing the rules by which professional soccer is
governed was not one of them.
Since Busbys retirement Manchester United had, in Bobby
Charltons view, become the laughing stock of the football
world. Under Tommy Docherty the next five years would read
like acheap novel. All was revealed, as they say, when Docherty
and Willie Morgan became embroiled in a legal battle which
was triggered by a television interview screened by Granada
eighteen months after The Doc left Old Trafford. Comment-
ing on Dochertys performance, Morgan described him as
about the worst manager there had ever been. Docherty sued
for libel. This he would later describe as the biggest mistake of
my life.
Morgan spent two years preparing his defence, during which
he gathered enough evidence to level twenty-nine separate
allegations of misconduct against Docherty, covering the years
prior to the managers dismissal for having an affair with Mary
Brown. A number of players from the club were due to give
evidence on Morgans behalf at the Old Bailey, among them
Paddy Crerand, Denis Law and Alex Stepney.
To an eye untutored in professional footballs ways, the
charges laid against The Doc were damning. He was alleged to
370
er

have sold Cup Final tickets on the black market, two before the
a
i 1974 Final  for 100 each  and two hundred for a total of
7,000 when United reached Wembley in 1977. Docherty was
also alleged to have demanded a personal payment of 1,000 to
_allow George Best to play for Dunstable Town in August 1974.
Barry Fry, Dunstables Manager and a former United player,
testified that he had agreed the payment and was satisfied that
the money was for Dochertys personal use.
Many other incidents of this nature were recounted when it
was expedient to discredit Tommy Docherty. He had muscled
in on players commercial activities, carving a piece of the
action for himself whenever possible, as in an advertisement for
Gillette razors originally offered to Steve Coppell which
eventually featured Gordon Hill, and The Doc as well. Ona
tour of Australia in 1975 he committed the United players to a
head-tennis tournament in a deal agreed with an agent in
_ Manchester before leaving England. The United head-tennis
squad would consist of three relatively junior players  Brian
Greenhoff, Sammy Mcllroy and Steve Coppell  and The
Doc! The fee was 1,000 with more to come as the tournament
progressed, the money to be shared amongst the head-tennis
squad. The inference was that Docherty would get the lions
share of this money, the younger players a nominal fee. When
members of the first team learned of this arrangement, a row
ensued for the form was to distribute such money among all the
players through the players pool.
In Michael Chick and David Smiths book Betrayal of a
Legend this dispute is described as coming to a head in an
extraordinary scene more appropriate to gangland than to
Britains most prestigious football club.
One evening after a game in Sydney, Docherty called a
meeting of all the players. He sat at a table in front of them, a
full bottle of brandy on the table beside him. Each player was
allowed to speak. They aired their grievances. Then it was his
turn. One by one he laid into them, telling them what he
thought of them as footballers and people. This tirade was
prefaced by an admission that he had arranged the head-tennis
tournament with an agent before leaving Manchester. It was a
rough encounter, as Docherty knew it would be, for he had
371
insisted that seventeen-year-old Arthur Albiston remain out-  |
side the room on the grounds that the kid was too young for this |
kind of thing. The confrontation lasted an hour, by the end of
which, Alex Stepney claims in Betrayal of a Legend, the bottle
in front of The Doc was empty. There is no doubt that Busby
and his fellow directors were aware of scenes like this.
Willie Morgans libel action was subsequently heard at the
Old Bailey. Questioned by the players barrister about
apparent discrepancies in his evidence, Docherty was forced to
admit that he had told a pack of lies. Docherty was tried on
two charges of perjury in the same court in 1981, then acquitted
on the grounds that the lies were not deliberate. But mud sticks,
and, sadly and rather unfairly, Tommy Dochertys notoriety
has entered footballs folklore, the suggestion being that his
conduct was an affront to values prevailing in professional
soccer. Which begs the question, why wasnt he dismissed by
Manchester United during the five-year period when his
conduct was supposed to be at odds with the ethos of this great
club? After all, those who would later accuse him of notorious
behaviour were close friends of Sir Matt Busby, then the most
influential voice in the boardroom. There can be little doubt
that Busby and his fellow directors knew of Dochertys
activities all along. They werent shocked or minded to dismiss
him, because, lurid though his conduct may seem to the
outsider, many of The Docs alleged crimes were as old as the
professional game itself. And of course, after a bad start, his
team delivered on the field. Losing is the only crime in football,
as Frank OFarrell and Wilf McGuinness had both learned.
When Docherty felt the time was right to declare his love for
Mary Brown he sold the story to The People. He thought he was
safe. He had just won United their first major trophy in almost a
decade. The team that won had done so in the cavalier United
tradition, or so it could be argued. There was the scent of old
glory in the air. Tom felt secure. For another reason: adultery
was not unknown at Old Trafford. Wondering who might cast
the first stone, The Doc thought and thought again and
concluded he would be OK.
His instincts were correct. If you grow up in the Gorbals,
Glasgows legendary tenement district, your suss is usually
372
pretty good. On the day this tabloid scandal broke, Docherty
phoned his chairman and close friend, Louis Edwards, to mark his
card. Champagne Louis was still celebrating the Cup Final win
and was asleep that Sunday afternoon. His son Martin now a
United director, took the call. He promised to inform Father and
told The Doc not to worry. The next day Manchester United
issued a statement confirming that their managers love-affair was
a personal matter. The Doc remained sanguine.
Paddy Crerand was outraged. The clubs name was being
dragged through the mud. Sir Matt Busby was on holiday in
Ireland when the story of Dochertys affair broke on an
indifferent nation. Sir Matt was staying in the beautiful
Downhill Hotel in Ballina, Co. Mayo, in the west of Ireland. He
was on a golfing holiday with two of his pals, Peter Molloy and
Martin Flynn, both wealthy Manchester Catholics, both fond of
the ould sod.
Crerand phoned Busby at the Downhill: Whats he done
now? Sir Matt began. Paddy provided the details. Sir Matt
booked his return flight.
Laurie Brown had been reflecting too. His life had been
shattered in the most appalling public manner. What about his
two daughters? What about his job? How could he continue to
work at Old Trafford for the man now living with his wife?
Oddly, Brown came to the same conclusion as The Doc.
Adultery was par for the course at United. This thought had
reassured The Doc. Now Laurie Brown also drew some
comfort from it.
The Doc was sacked on 4 July. The following days Daily
Express headlined the story: CLUB wIvEs OUST Doc. Under the
joint byline of John Roberts/James Price this article explained
that Directors wives at the club, which is proud of its family
image, helped force Docherty out. Docherty was the source of
this news claiming, Ive been punished for falling in love. This
is the most shattering experience of my football life. The wives,
the Express added, had acted from shock and embarrassment
over his love affair. This news broke two weeks after the clubs
statement asserting that Tommy Dochertys love life was a
personal matter.
Between times one cannot say for certain what these club
373
wives did or did not do. Lady Jean Busby and Mrs Muriel |
Edwards were the ladies concerned. Both were extremely
decent, reasonably worldly people. There is no proof that their
influence was decisive in the sacking of Tommy Docherty.
On Monday 4 July the United Board met twice at Louis
Edwardss Alderley Edge home. First in at nine a. m. was
Laurie Brown. What happened at this meeting depends on
whose tale you believe. The conventional account is that Brown
offered numerous stories about -Dochertys conduct of club
business, the kind of evidence Willie Morgan would later gather
for his defence in the libel case. On hearing this we are assured
the Board was shocked and promised to sack the villain of the
piece and give Laurie a wage rise.
Some people around Old Trafford tell another story. In this
version Laurie Brown was informed that he would have to go,
The Doc would stay and a golden handshake would be paid
to Laurie to ease his hurt and shame. All the speculation of the
previous fortnight had prepared Laurie Brown for this verdict
so he had taken certain precautions. If he must go, then, Laurie
informed the board, he would sell his story about adultery at
Old Trafford to the tabloids. Hence the need for a second board
meeting. At which Tommy Docherty was given the bad news.
Tommy Dochertys affair with Mary Brown had been going
on for three years. They were discreet. There was nothing
cheap or lurid about their romance. Today, thirteen years on,
Tommy Docherty and Mary Brown live happily in Hyde,
Cheshire. They are clearly in love. She is a charming woman
whose misfortune it was to find herself in this soap-opera
setting.
What is really rather cheap about the Docherty Affair is the
way it was conducted and presented to the public. Manchester
United were certainly entitled to sack him, indeed another man
might have chosen to resign. If one discounts the official reason
given for his dismissal and believes the alternative account, it
appears that Docherty was sacked not for his behaviour but
because Laurie Brown threatened to create an even bigger
scandal by going to the tabloids with even more lurid tales of life
at Old Trafford. By and large the public has accepted the 
official account of this affair which portrays Manchester United
374
as a family club, shocked by adultery and worse, it seems, the
touting of blackmarket Cup Final tickets. When the business of
selling cup tickets to spivs was raised as a determining reason
for dismissing him The Doc smilingly retorted, Are you
sacking me for selling tickets on the black-market? Ive been
doing that since 1950! The hypocrisy shocked even this street-
fighter.
. Commenting approvingly on the decision to rid United of this
disreputable character, one newspaper observed: Sir Matt
Busby had created a club with high standards of public
conduct. Keeping Docherty would, it was claimed, fly right in
the face of Uniteds traditions. However, the hypocrisy of
Dochertys years at Old Trafford, ironically reflected in the
furore surrounding his demise, is extraordinary by any
standards. One might seek a perspective on Dochertys life and
times at Old Trafford by reflecting on the fate of his predeces-
sors. When Uniteds Board of Directors  the same men now
lauded for upholding decent standards - had sacked
McGuinness and O'Farrell nobody mentioned integrity and
tradition.
Billy Meredith would have understood the moral of
Dochertys five years at Old Trafford; the crime in professional
soccer is not to breach the regulations, but rather to be found
out. Life, as Meredith had observed it seventy years previously,
had not changed. The Wizard knew all about intergrity, he
possessed it. Until he entered professional football the Welsh
Methodist had been a man of principle. Forced to tarnish
himself, to lie and cheat and break the rules in order to get just
_ reward for his labour, Meredith insisted on speaking out,
pointing to the hypocrisy of the merchant class who ran the
professional game, spelling out, chapter and verse, how
preposterous their idea of integrity was. Meredith was a
crusader. Penury was his reward. Honesty was his virtue.
Unlike Catholics, Manchester Catholics in particular,
Methodists live by their principles. Most do anyway.
Methodism is not convenience food. Meredith took under-the-
counter payments, illegal signing-on fees and when necessary
represented the crooks on his Board by offering a bribe to Alec
Leake, the Villa captain, in order to try and fix a game. Why
375
not? As Meredith saw it integrity was like virginity  you either
had it or not. Methodists are like that, there are no subtle deals _
with conscience. You live by the book or you dont. yi
There was more than a touch of Billy Meredith about The |
Doc during his Manchester years. A rogue renowned for his
wheeling and dealing he was unapologetic for his various
breaches of football law. Tickets? Everyone sold to touts,
including directors. Under-the-counter payments illegal? 
Come off it. Everyone in professional football was involved at
some stage or another in backhanders. As in Merediths time,
club chairmen, the upholders of football integrity were at it
themselves as soon as they were out the door of the League
Management Committee. Illegal approaches to players  and
managers  contracted to other clubs, who didnt do it? Selling
stories to the tabloids was custom and practice in the game.
The Docs stories were simply better. If they wanted fiction he
was their man. The jokes were good as well.
The Doc had tried integrity  at Chelsea when he was naive
enough to send eight of his best players home for breaking the
curfew he had imposed at the hotel in Blackpool. That cost him
his job. He learned a bitter lesson and decided to conform to
footballs perverse notion of integrity, and being the impulsive
fellow he was and fundamentally honest  he was less inclined,
as the years wore on, to conceal his roguishness.
When Sir Matt came to reflect on a successor to Frank
O'Farrell  the man of real intergrity as victim  Dochertys
notoriety may have made him pause. Briefly. Busby had never
been a crusader like Billy Meredith. He had never been
indiscreet like The Doc. But he had long since been tarnished
by professional soccer, as had everyone else at Old Trafford.
The 1957 Cup Final team, the Red Devils, had received many 
times the number of Final tickets allowed for by Football
Association law which restricted each of them to an allocation
of twelve. Matt knew about this for he had sanctioned this
breach of regulations. Some of the players in the pre-Munich
era had bartered enthusiastically on the black-market. Matt
could not have been unaware of this. Those players were on an
artificial wage of 17 a week so who could blame them if they
doubled their annual salary by flogging a few tickets to the 
376
spivs? Within the context of professional soccer Tommy
Docherty was an imaginary villain. The truth is that given the
_ nature of the game Manchester United was bound to confront
_ teality sooner or later.
Insidiously, year by year the reality of professional soccer
_ seeped into Old Trafford in the post-Johnny Morris/Charlie
Mitten era. In 1963 the players were given 100 FA Cup Final
tickets each, a spectacular breach of Football Association rules.
_ By then a slush fund existed  as at every club  to bribe young
players to join United. This tarnished everybody from Busby to
Jimmy Murphy and the clubs coaches and scouts. Great
_ people, lousy game.
The myth of Uniteds integrity suited Matt Busby. When
players came looking for rises, the big money available
elsewhere, Matt could always point to the interests of
Manchester United Football Club, its ethos, which was
vaguely, increasingly vaguely, to do with integrity. Thus Denis
~ Law could be made to feel guilty about asking for a salary
journeymen were earning elsewhere. Thus, Bobby Charlton
_ felt he was conforming to Uniteds ethos when declaring that he
would play for nothing. Why should a great professional player
_ play for nothing? Nobby Stiles was the classic victim of the
psychology of integrity as promoted at Old Trafford. Having
initially signed for a Miraculous Medal from Lourdes, turning
| down 4,000 dirty money from Wolves, Nobby, one of the
- most beautiful spirits ever to serve the United cause, returned
from the World Cup realising that his wage, 35 a week, was
_ outrageously low. He was under contract and Matt Busby
_ reminded him that contracts must be honoured. After fourteen
_ years outstanding, cheaply bought, service, Nobby was trans-
- ferred to Middlesbrough for 22,500 in the period after the
_McGuinness sacking when Busby was back in charge. When I
_ discussed the Busby story with Paddy Crerand a short while ago
he said, alluding to his own departure from United during
- Dochertys time, I know I got a testimonial but I'd been there
thirteen years, everyone got a testimonial. Paddy is as honest
as the day is long. Hes a Busby loyalist, sadly he is wrong about
ey a number of things: testimonials for instance.
ey
Kir

Nobby Stiles never had a testimonial. He wasnt fly enough.
377
Like Paddy, Nobby believed the myth of integrity. Jimmy|
Murphy never got a testimonial. Jimmy ended up doing a |
bunk on British Rail. These scandals are down to integrity as it
is understood in football and as it was enforced by Matt Busby| \

at Manchester United after 1945. Billy Meredith would have_
laughed, as Tommy Docherty did. James Gibson and Harold |
Hardman would not have seen the joke.
Until the Mary Brown affair Tommy Docherty had been |
acclaimed as a worthy successor to Sir Matt Busby. They got on
well together.
Sir Matt Busby was no fool. He knew what The Doc was
like. He knew what the game was like. He had done his best to
administer professional footballs so-called laws, and they had
served him well, in fact you could argue that he might not have
been able to create the wonders he had done in a world where
integrity was real rather than fake. Now that his beloved United
was in trouble, staring relegation in the face, Matt was
desperate. Tommy Docherty was not the choice of Prudent
Matt, rather Matt the Gambler.
The Doc thought he had been employed to do the dirty
work. To him Manchester United was the best football club in
the world. But the team he found on arrival at Old Trafford
werent giving a hundred per cent, they were not interested in
how they played, only how long they played.
Bobby Charlton did me a great favour, he explains. Bobby
came to me one day at Stoke and asked permission to speak to
Matt and the chairman. Hed decided to retire. I knew that was
a decision I would have to make one day, and I knew it wouldnt
be a popular one.
Bobby recalls that decision: Id always wondered what it
would be like when you had to make a decision that you were
not going to play any more. I played in the World Cup in
Mexico in 1970, that was my last international. At the club we
really struggled for a couple of years and I began to feel
mentally drained as much as physically drained. And the
matches were getting hard, we nearly got relegated. I realised I
wasnt looking forward to getting up on a Saturday morning any
more, Im not wanting to play, so I thought maybe this is what it
378
a feels like. So I said to Norma one morning, I think I'll pack it in

}\ at the end of the season.
There was no ego or any of that rubbish about getting out at
the the top, because I wasnt going out at the top. We were
|
playing bloody awful. Id only had one full close season off since
|
h
I was seventeen. With playing for England, going on club or
international tours, the most Id ever had off was four weeks. I
knew it was over for me.
Charlton thought he would give The Doc a couple of
months notice. The board accepted his decision and on 28
April 1973, one of the greatest footballers ever to grace the
game played his last match against Chelsea at Stamford Bridge.
Bobby was the last Red Devil. He had made his debut
|
against Charlton in 1956 on a day when he had been desperate
to play and had done so with damaged ankle ligaments which
rendered his right foot useless. On one leg he scored two goals.
Seventeen years later he departed the professional game the
most honoured player in its history. Bobby won every honour,
but his place in football history owes more to what he stood for
than what he won: the power, grace and competitiveness will
never be forgotten. He did it in a certain style, as understood in
the barrios of Rio as the slums of Glasgow. Charlton the
footballer symbolised Englishness in a way that was unique to
him, in a way that brought honour to his people and to the
professional game as well. He was a sportsman, his dreams
nurtured in the paradise that was Mrs Watsons circa 53/55.
Few professionals remain untarnished, Bobby was one the few,
Pele perhaps the other.
Forty-four thousand people filled Stamford Bridge to pay
tribute to Bobby that April day. The Daily Mirror devoted its
front page to. him, sending a message to Britains greatest
sports ambassador as he plays his last League match. The
message was in the headline HAVE A NICE ONE BOBBY!
The Chelsea game was Bobbys 751st appearance for Man-
chester United. Chelsea won 1-0. At the end of the season he
left Old Trafford to become Manager of Preston North End. Of
Tommy Docherty, Bobby says: I didnt spend a lot of time with
him, just six months. I have no complaints about The Doc 
none at all  he had nothing to do with me finishing playing. On
379

.
||{
i
the contrary he was good to me. Occasionally Id have to go off  i
to London or somewhere to do a promotion or something and I
used to feel guilty for asking for time off other players werent
getting. Id always hated that even when I was playing for
England but Tommy never embarrassed me. People say _
Tommy Docherty told a load of lies and did this and that buthe |
was great with me.
Charlton was no mythic figure. He was a great pro. The ||
tribute that would probably please him most is offered by
Nobby Stiles: Bobby Charlton is everything thats good in this _|
game. Hes an ordinary working lad is Bobby. My relationship
with him is the same as it always was. People say he has
changed, he will never change. He was a pro. After Munich
when he was only a boy everything hung on him. I have great
respect for Bobby as a man, as a footballer and asa friend.
The only place in professional football where the word
integrity has any meaning is on the field. Dochertys treatment
of Bobby Charlton suggests that, rogue though he was, The
Doc understood this truth.
Denis Law was next on the list of immediate business.
Docherty thought Denis was a world class player coming to the
end of his career. So The Doc and Denis did a deal: Denis
would get a testimonial and bow out gracefully. Docherty broke
the agreement, giving Denis a free transfer and announcing this
to the press before informing the man who sponsored his
appointment at United. Law learned of his fate watching the
news on television. He went to Busby. He got no joy. Busby
refused, on this occasion, to interfere. Denis was disappointed
in The Boss. Hed wanted to retire, instead he joined
Manchester City, returning to Old Trafford to score the goal
that sent United down to Division Two: That was my last kick
in League football, Denis recalls.
Paddy Crerand was now top of the Docherty agenda. A
tricky one this, Matts adopted son. This time Busby did
intervene to suggest that Crerand be appointed assistant
manager. Docherty reluctantly acquiesced. There is no doubt
that Busby hoped Paddy would manage Manchester United
one day. Alas, managing life as it unfolded during the coming
months proved impossible for Paddy.
380
Tommy Docherty knew the professional game inside out,
every stroke in the book. One trick was getting rid of dangers to
your job, such as Paddy Crerand represented. Within six
months Crerand was gone. Docherty went to the board and
complained that Crerand was disorganised, unpunctual and
drinking heavily. Crerand remembers Sir Matt coming to him
one day: * Paddy, I believe youre drinking a lot and never at
the ground when youre supposed to be, he said to me. This
was completely untrue. On another occasion The Doc
arranged to take the playing staff to watch a big game at Derby.
Everyone was told to report to Old Trafford at three p. m. Then
Docherty ordered his secretary to contact everyone and tell
them that the coach would be leaving Old Trafford at two p. m.
Everyone except his assistant Crerand. Hed do that himself,
The Doc proposed. He didnt. Crerand arrived at the ground
an hour after the coach departed. Paddy left to manage
Northampton. Another problem solved in Dochertys distinc-
tive style.
He wanted to get rid of Alex Stepney. Peter Shilton was his
preferred alternative. Sir Matt was consulted. The Doc had no
inhibitions about seeking advice from Busby: Why not, when
the greatest football manager of all time is sitting in the office
down the corridor? he says. Sir Matt was not against signing
Shilton, but he was against distorting Uniteds wage structure,
as Docherty explains: They were on 300 a week, the lowest
paid players in the First Division. Shilton wanted 400 a week.
End of deal. When I signed Jimmy Greenhoff from Stoke in
1976 he took a 50 a week pay cut to come to United.
By then much had happened. Lou Macari had arrived.
George Best came back briefly, but sadly it did not work. The
Doc met George socially. It was autumn 1973. George hadn't
played for almost a year. His life without football was
desperate. He drank more than ever, his business interests were
sinking fast, and gambling compounded his money problems.
George had never cared about money. In the good years hed
been a soft touch for old friends in need. He would play in
testimonials for old, failed, United players, taking no fee or
even expenses. The great player had_never been conceited,
never forgotten the lads in the reserve team dressing-room with
381
whom hed first got pissed in Zurich, danced in the Plaza, hung
around with in snooker-hall and bowling-alley. On the con- |
trary, his grief, the disease from which Georgie Best of tabloid
myth now suffered was twofold: he missed the simple pleasures
of his early years in Manchester and he missed his football, the |
one thing which made him feel fulfilled.
At a meeting in Paddy McGraths house, Sir Matt, The Doc
and George agreed to give it another try.
I knew I would never get back to full fitness, George
explains, but I thought if I could get back to seventy-five per
cent physically my skill and experience would be enough.
George trained mornings with the first team, afternoons with
the apprentices. He only missed one session. I could feel it
coming back. At first when I went past players Id get caught.
But we played at Tottenham and I scored and I was able to go
past people again. That game at White Hart Lane was the
fourth in Georges comeback. He played twelve consecutive
games, the last on 1 January 1974, a 3-0 defeat at QPR. Four
days later Docherty dropped him for the FA Cup Third Round
tie against Plymouth. ;
He looked frightened, Docherty recalls, there was fear in
his face before games, he wasnt enjoying football, it wasnt the
George Best wed known. I picked him to play against
Plymouth but he turned up at 2.40 and knocked on the
dressing-room door. I told him he wasnt playing and I never
saw him again.
George had always turned up at 2.40. Busby understood,
The Doc was not willing to accommodate this idiosyncrasy.
The other players didnt like it when they had to conform to the
rules and George did whatever he liked. United were relegated
that season.
George Best was finished. He was twenty-seven. My life
became total madness, he recalls. I stayed in bed all day.
getting up at four or five in the afternoon and having a drink.
The gambling got worse. George has no coherent memory of
the months immediately after he played his last game for
United. He was gone, his heart, like all footballs heroes, still
full of it. George was unlikely to prosper in the Old Trafford
dressing-room which was an unhappy place once more. The
382
Doc fell in and out of love with his players depending on his
mood. Morgan was captain for a while. Then he and The Doc
fell out. The same thing happened with Stepney. And Macari.
When success arrived things went from bad to worse. Stan
Flashman arrived at Old Trafford. Once he would have had to
hang around in the car-park. The Doc brought him up to the
directors lounge to pass on the Cup Final tickets. The barman
who witnessed this outrage was so angry he punched the tout 
now a Football League chairman  and made to whack Uniteds
manager.
For five years all professional footballs vices were brazenly
practised at Manchester United, the club renowned for the
high standards of its public conduct. Tommy Docherty played
as enthusiastically as anyone. He muscled in on lucrative
product endorsements originally intended for his stars. He
behaved as most professional football people do, breaking the
rules with exceptional relish. He was also impulsively generous
when the mood took him. After the 77 Cup win he gave the
players 5,000 out of his own pocket. Martin Buchan who had
been in and out of favour was given the money. As the players
had dispersed for the summer Buchan gave it back to The Doc
for safe-keeping until the lads returned for pre-season training.
Meanwhile Tommy got sacked and decided to keep the
readies.
What Tommy Docherty did at Old Trafford was to open the
gates to the culture of professional football, the squalid reality
of everyday life in the English game. He banished hypocrisy.
I went to see him in Hyde in the autumn of 1990. He and
Mary live in style on a few pleasant acres of lovely Cheshire with
a paddock out the back for Marys daughters horses. Tommy
Docherty earns a living as a broadcaster and after-dinner
speaker. In private he is not the notorious man of tabloid
repute. He talks sense about the game, his opinions the product
of asharp mind doused ina sardonic spirit. A certain innocence
remains not about the business of pro football, rather about the
game on the field. He played with Finney. Talking about this
great old footballer, The Docs hardened Gorbals face, pock-
marked and fleshy in middle-age, softens as he reminisces:
Tom was a great player, the best ever, better than George  he
383

ee
eee
See
turned up more often  no, seriously, you could toss a coin
between Finney and Best. George was a genius, Finney was
more reliable. He had the perfect temperament. If you kicked
Tom he just walked away. Off the pitch he was a gentleman,
didnt drink or smoke and wasnt a bird man or anything like
that. I used to train with him. He was an animal for fitness. This
Tom Finney was Nat Bucks Slave, you will recall. The Doc
belonged to a generation of football men who had learned from
the Finney experience.
The Doc also eulogises Stan Matthews and Gordon Milnes
father Jimmy, who was Prestons trainer in his time: A lovely
man, old Jimmy. He recalls with regret the unfulfilled promise
of his first team, the Chelsea side he more or less finished by
sending eight of them back home from Blackpool: I was too
impetuous, too much of a disciplinarian. I could have handled it
better, got the same results in a different way.
This team was, one senses, his great opportunity to be what
he wanted: I wanted to be the best, to win the Championship
the way Busby had won it with United in the Fifties. My
philosophy about how the game should be played was simple:
good passing, quick wingers, an attacking, entertaining side. I
have always believed that football must be entertaining. If you
entertain the public, the ground wont be big enough to hold
them. If you dont, youve got no chance. I had great players at
Chelsea: Osgood, Venables, Charlie Cooke, Eddie
McCreadie. When they broke the rules I had to make a
decision. In hindsight it was the wrong one.
Football cynics will smile at the idea that one might seek to
explain The Doc by reference to the team he impulsively
destroyed. People prefer the simpler image of Docherty, the
one he has traded on over the period since he left Old Trafford.
He is the sum of his experience. He has been in professional
soccer all his working life. Everything that is objectionable
about the game as it has, inevitably, evolved from its deformed
beginning can be perceived in the persona of The Doc. Behind
his mask there is a sadness too; a heart that once was full of
football.
Going to Manchester United was another chance. He failed
without honour. One might conclude that if he did not possess
384
the strength of character to manage Chelsea he was unlikely to
discover it four jobs and several years on.
Tommy Docherty loves Sir Matt Busby: Hes a lovely man.
He never once interfered, apart from the Shilton business, if I
wanted a player I could go out and get him. Docherty believes
Busbys concern about wages was prophetic: Matt told me he
could see the future of our football, players salaries would
become so inflated that it would be the ruination of the game.
He was right. He had great vision.
Docherty brought Jimmy Murphy back to Old Trafford.
Again his instincts were sound: Jimmy was a wonderful man.
He went to see Steve Coppell play for Tranmere and told me to
buy him. Sign him, Jimmy said. So I rang Bill Shankly and
Shanks confirmed Jimmys opinion. I bought Coppell with-
out seeing him play. Docherty understood that things were
strained between Sir Matt and Jimmy. I knew something was
wrong, that Jimmy hadnt been looked after. United were a big
club and they should have done things in a big way.
At first The Doc socialised with Sir Matt, Crerand, Paddy
McGrath, Peter Molloy, the Kennedys and all the other
members of what he calls The Manchester Mafia.
Wed go out with the wives on a Saturday night to the
Cromford or the Queens for a meal and a few bottles of wine.
Matt, Jean, Sandy and Sheena were lovely people, wed have a
sing-song, the company was great. But then players like Willie
Morgan and Stepney would be joining in and I thought this is
wrong, so I backed away from that.
I was getting home at five and six oclock in the morning from
~ the Cromford or the Queens, players would be chipping in with
opinions about other players, things would be said. I wanted to
be judged as-a football manager rather than a socialiser.
So The Docs life at United was lived on a number of levels;
after a while he became a successful manager. He fought with
players, behaved as venally as was necessary to survive,
socialised with the Busby family one day, dealt with Stan
Flashman the next. Manchester United had become just
another football club, run on the same principles as all the rest.
Nobody objected. Until Tommy Docherty fell in love with
Mary Brown.
385
|
:

: |
Sir Matt knew about The Docs wheeling and dealing at Old
Trafford. He stood for it because, for all his wretched spivery
with tickets, Docherty was not cynical about the game on the
field. For his first eighteen months at United he tried to play a
negative game to avoid relegation. Now, for the first time since
the war, Manchester United had ball-winners in midfield.
Tommy Cavanagh, Dochertys coach, spouted the jargon of the
Second Division and beyond, jargon that in the 1990s is the
universal language of English soccer. Sir Matt dropped by to
see Docherty one day when they were doomed to relegation.
Assuring him that his job was safe, Busby pleaded: Play the
Manchester United way, if were going to go down lets go in
style, with a bit of class. The Doc obliged.
Sir Matt had fought a long war for his kind of football. He
created three great teams, in three separate sets of circum-
stances. Glorious flowing football and a certain decency of
behaviour were their common denominators. But the dressing-
room beneath the Old Trafford stand was a different place now.
Gulfs were endemic. It was no place for a young lad to grow into
greatness. United was no longer the club of Matthas dreams.
19
The and the
_Merchant
Professional
Nobody is bigger than the club.
Matt Busby

After he retired as team manager Sir Matt had a brief tussle
between reason and instinct. Reason argued that his presence
at Old Trafford would be a problem for those attempting to
succeed him. Instinct replied that the club was where he
belonged. Instinct won.
Manchester United was still the family home, the club and its
people, old players, the office staff, the groundsmen and the
laundry ladies, the focus of Sir Matts life. That was why he kept
an office at the ground. He did not want to interfere, but he
could not walk away. Old Trafford was his home, his life, his
family; it had replaced the one terminated by a snipers bullet at
Arras in 1916. United was Lady Jeans family too, the one that a
warm, loving fosterchild had never really had. Yes, the Busbys
had a phobia about family, it was understandable. Sir Matt was
still living in Kings Road, Sir Willie in more lavish circum-
stances. But the Busbys were a happy family, with a content-
ment of the spirit that meant more to them than material
possessions.
Manchester United was his dream given life and substance.
Without Mattha and the dreams inspired by Alex James and
Hughie Gallacher the glory of Manchester United would never
have existed. Manchester United is not merely a football club,
its a beautiful memory: the 48 team  Carey, Cockburn,
Rowley, Pearson, Mitten and Jimmy Delany; the Red Devils;
then, post-Munich, Law, Charlton, Best, Nobby. Football as
never played before on Englands grounds. There is no doubt
about the source of this wonder: Sir Matt Mattha Busby.
387
Matt and Louis Edwards had their deal about Martin and |
Sandy going on the Board. In 1970 Martin Edwards was made a ~
director. The following year Sir Matt himself joined the board. _
The souvenir shop was beginning to go nicely.
Matt began to smell a rat round about 1974. Sandy knew his
old fella. Somethings going on, Matt told the family, his
instincts alerted by a subtle change in Louiss manner. Sir Matt
had hoped to be elected chairman, just for a couple of years, a
final symbolic recognition of his contribution. So he waited and
waited. Nothing happened. Now it was time for part two of the
deal: Sandy to go on the Board. A reason had existed for
delaying Sandys appointment: he was in the bookmaking
business. Football League regulations prohibited bookies from
being directors of clubs. They were the wrong type. Merchants
were the right type. Men like Louis Edwards.
Louis had never sought power or influence. He just wanted to
be around, to buy the champagne and bathe in the reflected .
glory. But by the mid-Seventies he was in trouble. His business
empire was beginning to crumble, partly because of his
extensive involvement in football, and also the fact that Local
Authorities with whom Edwards & Sons did most of their
business were cleaning up their act after the Poulson/T. Dan
Smith scandals. Soon the Edwards family meat business would
be on the verge of bankruptcy.
But Louis had a new pal: The Doc. He had always been in awe
of Matt, the lap-dog nature of the relationship understood by
both. Louis knew Matts other pals laughed at him behind his
back. The Doc did not laugh at Louis, they laughed with each
other. The boy from the Gorbals and Champagne Louis got on
famously. They had both been laughing stocks in their time, both
were strangely lonely characters behind the bonhomie. Martin
Buchan talks of glimpsing The Doc at odd moments looking
rather sad and vulnerable. The Doc himself remembers Louis
with affection, a big, generous man, a lonely soul really.
Between The Doc and Louis there was a measure of mutual
respect which neither man easily found elsewhere. They were
rogues, free spirits, whispered about and scorned when the
party went wrong. They dined together, shared many a bottle of
Dom Perignon and chewed the best cigars.
388
i When The Doc called Louis Mr Chairman he meant it.
Louis had done a lot for Manchester
getting the credit. Until now.
United without ever

Who had bought the worthless shares for forty-one grand to
give Matt Busby control of United? Who had joined forces with
Matt to solve the Harold Hardman problem? Who had
supported Matt when he needed to buy all those players after
Munich? Who went with Matt on the Quixall deal, the Setters
deal, the Cantwell and Herd deals? Who helped clinch the
Paddy Crerand transfer? And who went to Switzerland to bring
home Denis Law?
Johnny Foy? Paddy McGrath? The Catholic Mafia? The
people who sniggered at Louis The Lump, Matts lap-dog?
No. Louis Charles Edwards was the man who served the
Busby Cause, Manchester Uniteds cause.
The Doc understood his chairman. He had had a great
chairman in Joe Mears at Chelsea in the old days.
Sir Matt waited patiently. He knew he was not going to be
chairman. But Sandy was no longer in the bookmaking game.
Sandy could go on the Board now. Louis avoided the subject.
Sir Matt decided to confront the directors. He hated confronta-
tion but he was angry now. The club were in Majorca on
holidays. Sir Matt and the directors were sitting round the
swimming pool of their nice hotel, having a few drinks.
Everyone was relaxed. Sir Matt gathered them round, his
board: While were all here, gentlemen, I want to put forward
my son to be a director of Manchester United Football Club.
There was an uneasy pause. Sir Matt broke the silence: Im
going to ask you one by one. Alan Gibson pointed out that
Martin Edwards was not there so the subject could not be
discussed. Bill Young thought it was not on because Sandy was
a pal of Paddy Crerand. What kind of statement is that? Sir
Matt demanded. Ill have you know Paddy Crerand is a player
who has given great service to this club. He helped us win the
European Cup.
Sir Matt turned to Louis Charles Edwards, the man he had
invented. Louis said no. He wanted his youngest son, Roger, on
the Board. Mr Secretary, Les Olive was there. Sir Matt turned
to him and said: I want this in the minutes of the next Board
389
meeting. Then he turned back to his lap-dog: We had an a 
agreement, you and I, that Sandy would go on the Board.
Louis told him it would be discussed at the next board meeting.
The board supported Louis. Sir Matt and Lady Jean went
round to Sandys house that night to break the news: My mam
was sick, Sandy recalls. Sir Matt was too. Sandy told them not
to worry, he would rather not be on a Board with people like
that.
Sandy Busby was not just a friend of Paddy Crerands. Big
Duncan, Shay and Bobby, little Eddie Colman, George Best,
all of them were Sandys friends. He was one of them, a
footballer, a good lad.
Next they took Sir Matts club car from him. Wasnt he a
director now? Only employees had club cars. Sir Matt bought
the car from Manchester United Football Club. He stopped
fighting. Hed always hated fighting.
In 1970 the Edwards family started planning a Rights Issue.
Roland Smith, another United Billy suggested the Rights
Issue as a way of raising money for United and for Louis whose
business was now in a mess. Sir Matt opposed the Rights Issue.
He argued that United could raise money by other means.
There were other means of raising money but these might cause
the Edwards family to lose control of their club.
Busbys opposition created a fuss, providing a focus for
discontent over the Rights Issue. Researchers from the World
in Action television programme were attracted to this noise and
began to poke around. When they came to investigate Louis
Edwardss meat empire, World in Action discovered myriad
examples of bribery and corruption. You could write a book
about this kind of thing. In fact Alex Stepneys Betrayal of the
Legend is such a book. This book is rather twisted in so far as it
purports to explain Manchester United Football Club. The
depiction of Champagne Louis as some kind of villain unique
in the history of professional football  or indeed of Local
Authority transactions  is unjust and misleading. Business is
business. Louis is not the villain of the Manchester United
story. Louis was OK. As Billy Bunters go, Louis was better
than the average. He was an expansive merchant. Matts lap-
dog.
390
The television programme screened in January 1980 vilified
Louis Edwards in classic muck-raking style. A month later he
died. Louis died an unhappy man. According to his son Martin
he died of shame.
Dave Sexton succeeded Tommy Docherty as manager on Sir
Matts recommendation, his last influential act at Manchester
United. Sexton was another Puritan, a first-class type like
Frank O'Farrell, in many ways the best of his caste. But he
wasnt Uniteds style. Perhaps, more profoundly, Sexton, an
English Catholic, was wrong for Cottonopolis the city of
extravagant rogues, men who thought anything was possible.
Ron Atkinson followed, Big Ron. He was more Man-
chesters style, in fact, classically so: the gear, the patter, the
night, the rub-a-dub-dubs. Ron was a rogue. He did well. He
bought Bryan Robson and Remi Moses for 2 million. Sir Matt
thought this was too much. Shortly afterwards he resigned from
the Board to become President of United, a titular role, a
figurehead, as he wryly remarked one night in Belfast not too
long ago.
In 1982 Lady Jean was struck by Alzheimers Disease. Sir
Matt himself survived a cerebral haemorrhage in 1981. Lady
_ Jean and he had moved toa flat in Wilbraham Road where he
cared lovingly for her as she slipped away from the conscious
_ world. Her final years were spent in a nursing home. Every
afternoon Sir Matt, whom she no longer recognised, sat and
held her hand for two or three hours. They had come a long way
together from Bellshill. Harold Riley recalls seeing them
having a pre-dinner cocktail in the Midland Hotel one evening _
in the Eighties. They were like lovers, great pals after all their
years together. Lady Jean died in 1986. Sir Matt visits her grave
twice a week: He just walks up and down smoking his pipe,
Sandy says.
In 1989 the lease on the souvenir shop ran out. Sandy had
made a great success of it. The business was flourishing, the
legend of Manchester United growing all the time. Martin
Edwards sent a letter to the Busbys explaining that the lease
_ would not be renewed. United bought the old stock and made a
: settlement of about 100,000.
: Although Martin Edwards doesnt actually say so, there is
391
little doubt that taking back the lease was a measure of oe
for his fathers death: If Matt had gone along with the Rights 
Issue at the time World in Action probably would not have hada
story. But the publicity from Matt opposing it got people
interested and they started to dig, Martin explains.
Martin Edwards is Chief Executive of the new Manchester
United, a corporation as well as a football club. Martin, the
merchants son, is the putative villain of the piece, but to paint
him thus is unfair. He is a businessman, United his business. He
sits, smoothly charming, in his large office above the new
souvenir shop. He likes Sir Matt because he has always been
pleasant with me, Martin explains.
I have never fallen out with Sir Matt, I like him and respect
him for what he has achieved. I think he was one of the greatest
managers of all time. He is not brash in any way, in fact hes
quite a humble man, a lovely man. But I suppose there had to
_be a toughness in there to get the success he did.
All the great men have to be tough at some time otherwise
they get washed away, Martin ventures.
Perhaps he is thinking of the man he calls Father.
Father and Matt did it together after Munich. Father sup-
ported Matt and I think Matt welcomed Fathers involvement.
They were a good partnership. They ran the club together really.
Father was with Matt on the Law deal and all the other purchases
at that time. Obviously the combination worked. That period
from 63 to the European Cup win was very successful. It was then
that Father became prominent with Matt.
At the end of the day we have all benefited in some way
because of the traditions. In one sense tradition makes life
harder.
Martin goes on to talk about the lingering shadow of
tradition, which, he explains, you cant allow to dominate
you.
You are never going to get rid of the Best/Law/Charlton era,
that is always going to be held up as an example, it is part of our
history, you have to live with it. The point I am trying to make is
that you have to have continued success to ever live it down, if
you can live it down. The past is the past. You live with the
shadow of Sir Matt. It is there.
392
It would be easy to take Martin Edwardss words out of
__ context to mock the notion of living down the past. But he isa
pleasant young fellow, a man of his football time, obeying the
imperatives of this age. Of course, he is a businessman coming
from a different place than many of us, the lads, who played
another game in another age. Martin has not been notably
generous to Sir Matt Busby. But as we have seen, professional
soccer is a hard game and when it suited Sir Matt he played as
tough as anyone. So when searching for a villain we can leave
Martin out, although that is not the way many of my pals would
have this story told.
Some other old players bear a grudge of a kind against Bobby
Charlton. Bobby came back after seven years away to become a |
director of the Edwardss United. His paradise has changed:
You have to be realistic in this day and age. Oh, it was changed,
it is just not the same game as it used to be, much as you would
like to go back to the old days. The only way you can have the
- same sort of feeling is to try and have the same kind of success.
That is as near as you can get. I am trying my best to maintain
the standard set by Sir Matt but it is just not the same game.
Talking to Bobby one can see that underneath the director he
is, as Nobby says, the same lad he always was. The problems
_ have changed, his role is different, he serves United as best he
can. He is a tough lad, is Bobby, not a sentimentalist, except
about the paradise days. He has grown up, accepted profes-
sional football for the hard business it is, not become a victim.
Some Lads resent this. But when you hear Bobby speak
about paradise, see his eyes moist at the mention of the Crash
and listen to him talk about Jimmy you understand the Lads are
wrong, very wrong indeed.
I remember when Ifirst started out as a pro, he reflects. I
had a cousin who owned a greengrocers shop and I asked him
how much it cost him to set himself up in business. I thought one
day Id have to do the same. I assumed it would be when I was
about thirty-five. He told me it cost him two thousand and I
_ worked it out, ifIcould save a hundred pounds a year I should
be all right. That was all the security I wanted in those days.
How its changed for players now, he says in wonder.
Bobby and Denis Law never really got on: Hes mellowed
393
over the years, Denis admits, he has become more approach: |
able. I get on all right with Bobby now, probably better than
when I played. Its ironic that Bobby will almost certainly :
become chairman now. I think it would be a good thing for 
Manchester United.
Bobby Charlton is a world-renowned name, respected
everywhere. A diplomat. Denis smiles sardonically.
Jimmy Murphy died in 1989. He left a large, lovely family
behind. Sir Matt and Jimmy were strangers at the end. His son,
Jim, talks fervently and succinctly about his dad. They got to
know each other over the final ten years, sharing many a pint in |
the Throstles Nest. Jimmys heart was full of it to the end. He |
found Steve Coppell for The Doc, later he spotted Peter
Beardsley playing for Carlisle, Paul Parker, and young
McAllister who is now at Leeds. Ray Houghton was another
Jimmy first saw playing for Fulham.
On Beardsley Jimmy was fascinating: My dad saw him
playing first as an out and out striker. He wasnt impressed. He
thought Beardsley should play as a sort of advanced midfield
player, young Jim recalls. But seeing these players Jimmy had
no one to tell about them. One night in the Throstles Nest he
said to his son, Why should I bother my arse going down there, 
nobody listens. He was not bitter, Jim explains, just sad.
Jimmy Murphy, the immaculate dresser, did not bother in the ~
end: Hed go down to the pub in his old clothes, just sit there
and have his pint, his son recalls.
My dad never said anything against Sir Matt or the club. The
only thing he used to feel when he went to Old Trafford was the
loss of tradition. The souvenir shop, the museum, the basket-
ball team, the Lottery office, the Miss Manchester United 
models, there were so many different ventures. My dad was a
traditionalist.
He was a great football man. Of the many heroes of these :
pages Jimmy is, perhaps, the truest reflection of the game as
treasured in our memories.
A few years before he died Jimmy was rushed to hospital. ~
Something had burst, his son cant remember exactly what.
Bobby Charlton and Freddie Pye came to see him. Pye,
another Manchester lad, was chairman of City. My father was {

394
all wired up, at deaths door, and hes telling Freddie whether
or not to sign Paul Stewart. Lots of football people came to see
_ him. Sir Matt never did. It was only after he died, at the funeral,
__ I was speaking to Les Olive and Les said that Sir Matt had just
_ been to see Joe Mercer in hospital in Rhyl. I thought, he went
_ fifty miles to Rhyl to see Joe and he wouldnt come five miles to
_ see my dad. Young Jim thought it strange. A hard game.
Sir Matt Busby CBE, Freeman of Manchester, still goes to
the ground every day. The hardest man in this hard game, the
professional who survived the longest. He is a lovely man. The
world has honoured him, but professional football never could
_ find a way to honour its greatest man. Matt Busby was a
_ romantic. He loved the game, more than people or possessions.
Through his love he rendered professional football in England
more beautiful than any other man. Yes, Frank OFarrell was
right, Manchester United was Matts fantasy world. His
greatest achievement was to create the illusion of beauty in a
- craft wretchedly deformed from the beginning. As it decays
now, the plaything of spivs and merchants, the glorious
memories of Matt Busbys United serve to soothe the pain. His
has been a strange kind of life, a strange kind of glory.
The old man is eighty-two. Yet not an old man. Ive been in
many large rooms with him during the course of researching this
book, and any room he walks into is hushed in reverence. A
great man is present. His old pal Paddy McGrath is usually with
him, the two of them still impeccably dressed, handsome,
_ imposing. You can imagine them in Blackpool, the lads in their
prime. And you can understand what Big Louis fell for, why he
ended up in the palm of Matts hand.
Unlike many of those closest to him Sir Matt is not bitter.
Others reflected on the disappointments: Louis reneging on the
agreement about their sons going on the Board. Martin refusing to
renew the lease on the clubs souvenir shop at the very moment
when Manchester United was being valued at more than 20
million. Smaller things rankled. At the clubs Centenary Dinner
Sir Matt had not been seated at the Top Table. When the smart
new restaurant opened at Old Trafford the clubs executives
enjoyed free lunches. Nobody told the Club President. This oversight was taken as a slight. But not by him. When Bobby Charlton became a director some regarded this
as treachery, a service rendered to the new man, a betrayal of
Sir Matt. He did not share that view, the old man was too wise in
the ways of professional football to dwell on such matters. As
he always reminded troublesome players  Johnny Morris,
John Giles, Denis Law  nobody is bigger than the club. Not
even the last great football man.